What is 5-S? 
To define the 5 S in simple words, organizing the workplace i.e. keeping it neat and clean, standardising for easy maintenance and developing self discipline among the people to sustain these activities by themselves. 

​Contents:
Objectives of 5 S 
Introduction
Good housekeeping - a scientific approach 

What is 5 S
5S Overview
Benefits of 5 S
Implementation Steps of 5S 

​Objectives of 5 S: 
1. To understand why 5 S techniques implementation is necessary in our company.
2. To learn the principles to implement 5 S techniques in our organization.
3. To understand the direct benefits in regard to Productivity, Quality and Safety as a results of 5 S implementation.
4. To enhance our commitment towards good housekeeping in achieving world class status.
5. To make profit / money, Customer satisfaction, Producing quality product 6. In time delivery / process, Reducing inventory, Cost control
7. Resources optimization (all 3 Ms – Man, Machine, Materials) 8. Safe working conditions, Wastage elimination, Productivity 
 
Introduction:
Industries which are thinking to improve their quality of product, productivity & reduction in costs, the first requirement is to improve the housekeeping of organisation. Housekeeping is rightly called “Stepping stone to improve Productivity”. 
A company with good housekeeping practices will have a good foundation for launching various techniques for improving the productivity, quality & safety besides reducing the costs. 
In fact housekeeping practices reflect the management’s and employee’s general attitude towards work. 

Good Housekeeping - A Scientific Approach: 
Scope for improvement ?
Developed and implemented successfully in JAPAN
5 STEPS in workplace for higher Quality and Productivity
All five steps starts with ‘S”  so called as 5S 
If we look around the place, whether it is home or our work area, we can always find lot of scope for improvement. As a matter of fact we do not have to go too far to learn good practices. The best example of a good housekeeping is available right at our homes. The way a house-wife keeps her kitchen and stores, tells us a lot about the techniques of good housekeeping. It is no wonder then that out of an average of about 5000 articles are stored in a middle class family and every item can be easily picked up on demand within minutes or seconds. 
 
What is 5-S? 
The concept of 5 S techniques was originally developed and implemented successfully in JAPAN. They have identified 5 steps in improving housekeeping in work place for higher quality & productivity. They are  
1S – Seiri -    Sorting out  
2S – Seiton -    Set In Order (Systematic Arrangement)  
3S – Seiso -    Shine (Spic & Span)  
4S - Seiketsu   -    Standardisation
5S – Shitsuke   -   Sustain (Self Discipline)

As all the five steps start with the letter “S” it has been termed as 5S techniques in short form. 
The above are not a few findings, they are the basic requirements to keep our work place systematically. But, we do not give much importance to these practices practically. Normally we have system of cleaning up a place when any audit is scheduled or VIP visits or at the time of Dasara or Vishwakarma Pooja. At that time, we sort out the unwanted items and arrange the useful items in a systematic way. We go for white washing to create spic & span atmosphere & we wear new clothes and observe high order of self discipline. In reality, all the above are the practices which we have been following as per our Indian culture and tradition for centuries. 
 
Systematic Practicing of such good habits is what is emphasized in 5S
5S is a more “DO IT YOURSELF” Approach
Changing the Mindset is very important 

 
Origin of  5’S’:- Takahashi OSADA introduced 5S System to Japanese Industries. In India 5S System Concepts gained momentum since 2002 
For Good Housekeeping - To Learn and Achieve 

Go to Home
Learn from our culture and traditions

Do It Yourself  

1. SEIRI : Sorting Out 
To sort out unnecessary items and to control the generation of unnecessary items is the main objective of Seiri. 
Look at all items, articles, tools or materials around your work area and ask yourself “Is it really necessary for this items to be there? 
Collect all the items and segregate them in three categories.  OK and useful materials.  Materials which can be made useful after some repairs or re-work.  The rejected or unsafe conditions. 
Repair the re-workable materials. Dispose off all the rejected or un-usable items, articles or resources and put them in the respective bins or scrap yard meant for the purpose. 
 
SEIRI Rule:- Red Tag Technique & 30 day rule

If you have any doubt to discard the materials, keep the material in red tag area with identification label with date.  
If the material is not utilised within 30 days, it assume this material is not usable then you can discard. 

Results of SEIRI:-
Creation of extra work space
Quality, Safety, Process improvements
Sample flow becomes more visible
Feels like a better (less clutter) place to work 

2. SEITION: Set In-Order / Systematic Arrangement 
A place for everything and everything in its place is the main aim of this step. 
Store all OK and usable items at a pre-fixed location so that they are easily accessible and can be picked up within 30 seconds.  
The golden rule to be remembered while storing is “A place for everything and everything in its place”. 
Analyse present situation and fix storage place.
Things we use frequently, keep it in work place or nearer to work place.
Things we do not use frequently, store somewhere away from work place.
Things we don’t use, but want to have on hand “Just in Case” keep as contingency items.
Indicate border for every equipment and provide name plate for every equipment.
Indicate the safety precautions and symbols at every equipment.
Indicate the inspection points for easy maintenance.
Indicate with symbols for identification of location for storing.  

SEITION Rule: 30 second rule – you must arrange a tool board so that you can get any tool within 30 seconds.

Follow the 3C’s Concept i.e Constant Place, Constant Container, Constant Quantity
Adopt Nothing on floor principle - except Human leg and M/c leg Nothing should be on floor
Follow the 3C’s guide lines i.e Can See, Can Take, Can Replace 

Results of SEITON:-
Eliminates the need to search for tools and supplies
Safety is improved with organized work places
Improved productivity
Less waste of motion (tools and supplies are located where needed .. at point of use) 

 
3. SEISO : Shine/Spic & Span 
The main objective of this step is Cleaning through Inspection which one can reduce production cost, improve quality, safety, increase machine life and maintain better housekeeping. 
Unless the machine, equipment, tools or the office is cleaned by the user himself, the benefits of good house keeping are hard to get. Therefore clean and maintain the office, work place, tools, machines and equipment in a neat and clean condition. 

a. Remove dust from every place and thing.
b. While cleaning observe, dirt clogging points, dust emitting points, loose & bare live wires, loose couplings, bolts, oil and air leakages etc.,
c. Rectify the defects revealed by cleaning
d. Identify and eliminate the source of dust
e. A cleaning standard to be prepared for every area equipment which can be implemented quickly everyday by every person. 
 
SEISO Rule:- 3 Minute Rule – do not delegate the cleaning to others. As far as possible try to clean your machines, tables, tools, jigs etc., By Your Self 3 minutes every day / every shift. 
Results of SEISO:- Remember

​A clean work area will create enthusiasm to everybody to give a good output.
Also, any dirt or grime in the workplace will spoil our health as well.

Performance of a clean m/c (OEE) will improve through sincere practice of seiso 

4. SEIKETSU : Standardising 
In this step, the concentration will be on regularizing all the above 3 S with ease and find out the ways for the first 3 S to sustain. Therefore it aims standardization and visual management. 
Even a clean work place with proper selection and proper arrangement will soon become dirty if above 3 steps are not continuously repeated. 
Having achieved a clean work place where all the items are stored properly in a systematic order, we should then try to create a serene working atmosphere with cooperation and team spirit. A good working environment can be created where everyone would like to come and work. 
With the involvement of all the members of the organization, it is possible to built a working atmosphere where every members tries to give out his / her best for the benefit of self, organisation and the society. 
 

Maintain a high level of house-keeping all the time.
Standardize your activities and procedures, so that the first 3S are ensured i.e 5W + IH 

SEIKETSU RULE : Follow 3 Week rule If you continuously follow the system in 21 days, it will become a habit, it will never stops. 
For creation of such a creative and charged atmosphere, one should start by changing himself first, like wearing uniform, shoe etc., others would definitely follow suit sooner or later through which we will achieve serene atmosphere. 
 
a. List out what is to be done on a machine, materials, work place and storage under standardization. 
b. All such inspection points and frequencies of cleaning items etc. are to be listed out for each machine. 
 
5. SHITSUKE : Sustain/Self Discipline 
This aims at to develop self-discipline, right mind set and attitude among the employees. It encourages a lot of management practices and creation of conducive work environment. 
It may be easy to achieve a difficult goal but it is very difficult to sustain the achievement. Even after achieving high standards of cleanliness, systematic arrangement and serene atmosphere, if the members of the organisation do not exhibit a strong sense of self discipline, all the benefits will slip out from our hands. 
Therefore, for continued maintenance of high level of good housekeeping, it is imperative that we should follow the rules, regulations and prescribed operation standard for good quality, safety and productivity. 
 
Shitsuke implies self-discipline and training to follow the previous 4 s
5s is not a one time affair and it is as Regular as any routine work
Observing safety rules, punctuality, following work instruction … 

SHITSUKE Rule : Follow 3 month rule
Train all employees; do not leave any one, including the contract labour. Give refresher training as required.
Communicate clearly don’t have any ambiguity
Assign clear responsibilities to everyone as far the 5S activities are concerned.
Team formation is important for sustenance.
Conduct 5 S inter Zonal Competitions and give awards
Conduct 5S slogan competition
Arrange for visit to companies where 5S is practiced well
Encourage employees to observe safety rules  

Benefits of 5 S:-

a. We save our floor space. Helps us to get rid of obsolete items and better utilization of existing material.
b. Easy access to the materials and materials can be easily retrievable
c. Time taken to search can be minimized and machine breakdowns can be minimized and handled fast.
d. Clean machines and floors expose problems like machine cracks / oil leakages fast and allows us immediate corrective action.
e. Smoother material flow and lesser production down time.
f. Standardised procedures minimize errors, defects go down and leads to improvement in productivity.
g. Easier, safer working conditions, more opportunities to improve and maintain quality.
h. Helps to improve interpersonal relationships and i. Sense of pride among employees. 
To conclude: In an environment where the 5s is meticulously practiced there will be:

More productivity
Enhanced quality
Improved morale
Reduced accidents
Better teamwork and synergy In - short it will be a happy bright workplace. 
 
The four dangerous ‘D’s:

Defects In Parts  
Delays In Delivery  
Damage In Reputation  
Drop In Profits 

Aim Towards the following Four ZERO Targets:

Zero Leakage  
Zero Spillage  
Zero Breakdown  
Zero Accidents 
 
The Rules of each ‘S’  

1S:  SORT   30 Day rule  
2S: SET IN ORDER  30 second rule  
3S: SHINE   03 minutes rule  
4S: STANDARDISATION 03 week rule  
5S: SUSTAIN   03 month rule 

The principles of each ‘S’
1S: value for space    
2S: value for time    
3S: value for workplace  
4S: value for safety    
5S: value for society   
 
5 S - Implementation Steps:

Step-1 Top Management’s Decision to implement 5S techniques in a structured approach  
Step-2 Conduct a Gap Analysis Study to assess the current level,  Magnitude of the task involved Resources required. 
Step-3 Conduct Short (2hrs) Awareness Programs for all Management staff on 5S System Concepts & 5S Implementation plan. 
Step-4 Frame the policy and objectives for 5S and Create an Organization Structure with clear roles and responsibilities. The Unit Head should be the Chairman of the 5S committee and all HOD’s should be members of the Steering committee. One of the senior executives should be identified as 5S champion. 
Step-5 Divide the unit into the required number of zones. No operations, functions & office areas are exempted from 5S implementation  All zones should have Leaders from their respective zones. 
Step-6 Create a 5S LOGO through an internal contest among Employees and finalize the Logo for the unit. Prepare a small pocket book on 5S for distribution to all employees. Formulate 5S pledge for daily practice 
Step-7 SEIRI - Conduct Seiri campaign regularly and introduce Red Tagging activities. Create a Red tag corner in the unit. Frame the procedures for disposal for unneeded and non moving items. Formulate document retention procedure for disposing old documents. Step-8 SEIRI (contd) Steering Committee should meet regularly to review the Red Tagged items and take corrective action for disposal, repair or reuse of all items. 5S champion/Zone Leader should maintain Red Tag Register 
Step-9 SEITON Make an assessment of all visual boards such as Bay boards, avenue boards, machine boards, work station boards with uniform size and color. Introduce Gang way Marking, WIP area marking, trolley positions. Bring uniform files for all office files with labels and index 
Step-10 SEITON(contd) Create a 5S Main Corner in a prominent location and display policy, objectives, zone details, before & after photographs and any other events related to 5S. 
Step-11 SEITON (contd) Install 5S Zone boards in all zones and display details of zone leader, members and activities planned for implementation. Some photographs related to the zone can also be displayed. 
Step-12 SEISO Prepare detailed cleaning check lists and responsibility matrix for all the zones Introduce 5min cleaning activity in all zones. Introduce proper/appropriate cleaning tools and devices for all areas. 
Step-13 SEIKETSU Prepare a 5S manual with all SOP’s and introduce color coding for Fire Extinguishers, office Files etc., Identify resource persons to be trained as Internal auditors and train them on internal audit methodology Prepare audit checklists for all zones. 
Step-14 SEIKETSU(contd) Prepare internal audit schedules covering all zones Conduct regular internal audits in all zones and display the scores in zonal boards. Internal audits should focus on effectiveness of corrective actions taken by zones on audit observations 
Step-15 Visit Best-in-Class 5S companies and adopt good practices observed. 
Step-16 Prepare KAIZENS for 5S improvements and document all of them. 
Step-17 SHITSUKE Introduce Inter-zone competitions and institute rolling trophy for best zone. Develop criteria for Best 5S employee and introduce rewards for motivation. Prepare Induction Training for 5S to be imparted for all trainees and new employees. 
Step-18 Arrange Audits by External Experts and make an assessment of the overall score for the unit against 1000 point score sheet. 
Step-19 Prepare the unit for External 5S competition and benchmark with other companies. 
Step-20 Create an award winning company and take measures to challenge “MODEL 5S COMPANY STATUS” 

Some Blank Formats relate to 5 'S':-

5 "S" Checklist:

​https://ce410b39-778a-49f8-9427-016752d47e26.filesusr.com/ugd/8fafd4_e0f205b359f14a168f12a01c458b4719.xlsx?dn=5%20%27S%27%20Check%20List.xlsx

5 "S" Audit Report Format:

https://ce410b39-778a-49f8-9427-016752d47e26.filesusr.com/ugd/8fafd4_3f0949c0e0e244159decd3b88b8dadc3.xls?dn=5S%20Audit%20Report%20Format.xls
​
5 "S" Audit Sheet:

​https://ce410b39-778a-49f8-9427-016752d47e26.filesusr.com/ugd/8fafd4_b491319e23fe4c4386f600f4ff30c98a.xlsx?dn=Audit%20Sheet.xlsx

5 "S" Training PPT

​https://ce410b39-778a-49f8-9427-016752d47e26.filesusr.com/ugd/8fafd4_fdeaf740b8f84cf283b24d085d8b2f11.pptx?dn=5S%20training%20program.pptx