What is a audit?

Broadly defined,an audit is a systematic review of operations and practices to ensure that relevant requirements are met.Traditionally,the term audit is associated with principles of accounting.Because of this,many people perceive a safety audit as an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) procedure or a financial accounting procedure.Indeed,the safety audit may apply similar methodologies used in financial audits to mitigate safety risks within any facility or operation.A sound business enterprise must check its safety practices as carefully as its accounting records.The debits of possible loss or injury situations should balance against the credits of adequate safeguards.Audits are not inspections. Audits evaluate all aspects of the program with special emphasis on the quality as well as the quantity of safety and health activities at every level.The basic goal of an audit is to verify that health and safety activities comply with institutional policies and federal,state,and local regulations.

Types Of Audits:
 
External : These are conducted by the third Party e.g CLI/RLI, consultant, NSC etc.  
Internal (In-company) Corporate : By Headquarters, Personnel from other units of the same company.                  
Self  :   In-house; by local plant personnel of other divisions. 
 
Audit Objectives: 

The objectives of the safety audit are to:  

Identify deviations from designed and planned operating and  maintenance procedures and standards; 
Identify plant conditions or operating procedures that could lead to an accident and significant losses in life or property; 
Ensure that the plant and operating and maintenance procedures match the design intent and standards; 
Keep the operating personnel alert to the process hazards; 
Review operating procedures for necessary revisions; 
Seek to identify equipment or process changes that could have introduced new hazards; 
Initiate application of new technology to existing hazards; 
Review adequacy of safety inspections; 
Look for major risk situations; and 
Recommend measures to improve overall safety performance of the plant. 
Definition & Comparison With Other Surveillance Techniques: 
Safety Audit, the title chosen for this publication, is increasingly being used as a general term to describe any of a wide range of levels of surveillance. However, the terms Safety Audit, Safety Survey etc. have specific connotations, although the examples in the appendices illustrate difference in interpretation between the US and the UK and between different firms employing such schemes of surveillance.
It is hoped that the following definitions will not only assist the reader but may help to standardize a more precise use of the various terms. 

Safety Audit:
A safety Audit subjects each area of a company‟s activity to a systematic critical examination with the object of minimizing loss. Every component of the total system is included, e.g. management policy, attitudes training, features of the process and of the design, layout and construction of the plant, operating procedures, emergency plans, personal protection standards, accident records, etc. An audit-as in the field of accountancy-aims to disclose the strengths and the weaknesses and the main areas of vulnerability or risk and is carried out by appropriately qualified personnel, including safety professionals. A formal report and action plan is subsequently prepared and monitored. 
 
 
Safety Survey:
A Safety Survey is a detailed examination in depth of a narrower field of activity, e.g. major key areas revealed by Safety Audits, individual plants, procedures or specific problems common to a works as a whole. 
These too are followed by a formal report, action plan and subsequent monitoring. 
 
Safety Inspection:
A routine, scheduled inspection of a unit or department which may be carried out by personnel within the unit, possibly accompanied by someone from outside. The Inspection would check maintenance standards, employee involvement, working practices, and that work is carried out in accordance with procedure etc., rather than the wide-reaching or in-depth approach take in Audits or Surveys. 
 
Safety Tour:
An unscheduled examination of work area, carried out by any one of a range of personnel from works managers to safety committee members, to ensure that e.g., standards of housekeeping are at an acceptable level, obvious hazards are removed and in general that safety standards are observed.

Safety Sampling: 
A Specific application of Safety Inspection/Tour designed to measure by random sampling the accident potential by counting safety defects. Trained observers record the number of safety defects seen while touring specified locations by a prescribed route. Typically, tour last only 15 minutes and are conducted at weekly intervals. The unweighted count of defects is used to portray trends in the safety situation. 
 
Hazard and Operability Studies (HAZOP) 
 
The application of a formal critical examination to the process and engineering intentions of new facilities to assess the hazard potential of maloperation or mal-function of individual items of equipment and the consequential effects on the facility as a whole. Remedial action is then usually possible at a very early stage of the project with maximum effectiveness and minimum cost. The technique can also be applied to existing assets. 
 
While unsuspected hazards may be revealed by a Hazard and Operability Study, the use of a formal checklist in engineering design departments helps to ensure that account is taken of accumulated experience, knowledge of the technology and best practice in the initial design. 
 
 
(Source: “Safety Audits : A Guide for the Chemical Industry” A publication of CIA, UK reprinted in India by ICMA).

Purpose & Types of Safety Audit:  
 
It is a normal part of good business practice to initiate and carry out systems of inspection and checking to ensure that operations are performed in an efficient and profitable way. No company‟s management would consider that its financial statement truly reflected the firm‟s position unless the accounts had been audited. The stores controller would be working in the dark were it not for periodical stocktaking. Engineers are rightly concerned that equipment is regularly inspected and checked. Control laboratory techniques ensure that specifications are adhered to. 
 
Accident prevention is just as much an aspect of efficient operation as is any other industrial activity. Yet many managers still tend to look askance at suggestions that their company‟s safety and loss prevention measures should be subjected to regular scrutiny and, where necessary, constructive criticism. In fact, safety audits (the process by which this is done) are an important tool for identifying falling standards, areas of risks or vulnerability, hazards and potential accidents in proposed and existing plants and processes; for determining the action necessary to remove hazards before personal injuries or damage occur; and for ensuring that the whole safety effort is effective, meaningful and the objectives understood. 
 
Before the managements of companies quail at the prospect of a possibly expensive and time-consuming addition to their activities, it should be made clear that safety audit schemes can be tailored to the needs of each location. A simple but often very effective method in some factories is a purposeful, frequent walk-round by a works manager, provided it is properly organized to cover a whole plant within a reasonable time and the object is to see that proper regard is being paid to safe working. Other sites, because of size, highly sophisticated processes or potentially hazardous chemicals, may require a more formal and complex auditing system, carried out by people with specialized knowledge and training. The important consideration is to ensure that some kind of audit, whether modest or complex, is carried out. The purpose of this publication is to help managements of companies of any size to do this. 

Purpose of Safety Audit: 
 
Various indices for attempting to assess the results of a company‟s safety activities are well known. They include injury frequency and duration rates, estimating financial loss due to fire and other damage accidents and recording the number and types of injuries. All these methods have certain things in common; they are quantitative rather than qualitative, and because they measure results only, are not always strictly related to the quality of a company's safety effort. 
What is needed, therefore, is a method which will give a reasonable indication of how well a company's safety programme is working in all its aspects, how hazards are being recognized and controlled, how unsafe acts are being eliminated, how accidents are being avoided, and to achieve this without using any failures as the yardstick.     The BCISC report “Safe and Sound” stated that the top management of the US chemical companies studied, which were noted for profitability as well as good safety records, were convinced that effective safety and loss prevention programmes were essential for a company‟s prosperity and accepted as part of good business. 
The report suggested that one requirement of such programmes was that their efficiency should be checked by the introduction of safety audits to ensure that a company's assets were effectively safeguarded. A system of independent auditing should use the best people available from either inside or outside the company, the report continued. 
The loss potential in the chemical and allied industries is high and is not restricted to large-scale incidents related to accidents, fires, explosions and similar incident. For example, failure or damage to cables and instrumentation equipment as the result of a minor incident has led to lengthy down-time of plant, resulting in heavy financial loss. 
Loss potential also is not confined to activities concerned with the production of chemicals. Any activity of a company, if not properly controlled and monitored, can deteriorate to produce situations which result in financial loss in varying degrees. 
The need for safeguarding a company's assets and taking appropriate measures to minimize loss and reduce the possibility of large scale loss situations developing needs to be clearly stated and accepted by management, in addition to the prime aim of preventing personal injury. It is the function of the safety audits to ensure that this need is properly met, and it is important to recognize at the outset that in-built opposition to their introduction may well be encountered and must be overcome. 
Undertaking such a project could be a frightening prospect to the management of a small chemical company. It need not be. Just as the small firm successfully adapts its laboratory and sales facilities to its size, so too can it adapt a control technique to ensure safe production, even though this may at first appear to  be tailored to the needs of the large-scale operator. 
  
Major Objective:
 
The major objective is to determine the effectiveness of the company's safety and loss prevention measures. 
An example of stated objective is: 

1. To carry out a systematic critical appraisal of all potential hazards involving personnel, plant, services and operation methods. 
 
2. To ensure that occupational health and safety standards fully satisfy the legal requirements and those of the company's written safety policies, objectives and programmes. 
 
 Whatever the objectives may be, it is of paramount importance that they be clearly defined after preliminary discussions within the plant or company, and that they then be effectively communicated to all concerned. They must also be subject to periodic review, as indeed must the technique as a whole. 
 In general, the objectives should cover the examination and qualitative assessment of all facts of safety of every activity. The activities should include research and development, design, occupational health and hygiene, environmental control, product and public safety (including storage, packaging, labelling and transportation) as well as those associated directly with production technical operation, maintenance, clearance certificates, emergency procedure, job descriptions and operating instructions, training, housekeeping and personal attitudes. 
 The formalized systematic critical approach of the audit technique can be applied with very real advantage at various stages in the development of a  new process or plant or in a major alteration to an existing one. (These appraisals are usually referred to as Hazard or Operability Studies). 
 
Authorisation of Safety Audits: 
 
It is an essential requirement of an audit system that it should originate with the policy-making executive and that the system and its objectives shall also be meaningful to line management who, after all, must not only understand and accept it, but also be prepared to adjust their own safety and accident prevention activities in accordance with indications, deficiencies or trends revealed by it. 
Audits may also result in questions needing policy decisions and proposals for capital expenditure, it is therefore important that board and senior management are seen to be the authority for the formal audit system and have committed resources – manpower and money – to implementing the changes agreed. It is also essential that an appropriate member of the board and senior management are directly involved in the review of audit reports leading to an action plan and in subsequent formal reviews of progress on the plan. 
 
Scope of Safety Audits:
 
All activities should be subject to audit. Inspections will cover the objectives laid down but will also aim to promote contract with individual workers as a manifestation of management's interest and concern; to gain their involvement, to encourage comments and suggestions relating to safety and invite co-operation in discovering conditions which need correction if a works is to be brought up to an approved safety standard. The scope should certainly not be limited to a cold appraisal (and perhaps condemnation) of physical conditions. 
 
Frequency of Safety Audits: 
In a broad outline, frequency will depend on the nature and type of activities within each area of operation. Clerical work, for example, will not be subjected to the same frequency of auditing as chemical production or maintenance work but must be periodically checked. A reasonable general guide is that inspection should be carried out once each year, with more frequent inspections for specific areas or activities. This can only be a rough guide and indeed differences will be noted in examples of audits in the appendices. Records of injury and damage accidents should be examined and used to identify high risk areas and activities and consequently those that need more frequent inspections. 
 
ROLE OF SAFETY AUDITS 
It has been a tendency to evaluate safety performance in terms of standard indicators like accident frequently and severity rates: and assessment of financial losses. In fact the absolute value of these indices or their relative decline over time also form the basis for national recognition of safety performance through the national safety Awards of the Govt. of India. But these indices are only quantitative measurement of the failure of the systems; and often do not reflect or even may not be directly related to the nature of the company‟s safety system. 
There is thus need for a methodology to evaluate the quality and character of the overall safety programme of the company and judge its effectiveness, not merely by measuring its failures. Safety Audit is such a methodology. 
 
The role of such an audit is made explicit by the following definition: 
“An Audit is a technique designed to ensure that the standards achieved at any given place of work and other places affected by work activities conform as closely as possible to the objectives specified by the management for control of the risk of injury and ill health; and damage to property, plant equipment and environment and to provide information to the management to justify continuation of the same strategy or a change of course.” 
 
Types of Audits: 
Broadly the type of safety auditing systems presently being undertaken in India may be classified in to two categories: 
-Internal Audits 
-External Audits 
     
Internal Audits 
At the outset, in this manual a distinction is being made between the plant safety inspections being carried out in industry and other internal safety audits. Plant safety inspection is being regularly carried our either by officers of the Safety Department, members of the Safety Committees, or other multi disciplinary/multi functional teams all drawn from the local management. The internal audit by distinction refers to those audits which are being carried out by technical team who are not part of the local plant managements. Within this category also two patterns are noticed. 
In the first, the team consists of technical personal from the Technical Services/Safety Department functioning at the corporate level. In case of Indian companies, these will be from the companies‟ Headquarters while in case of multinational companies such teams would normally come from the corporate headquarters of the parent company. 
In the second case, more common to multi companies; teams from one multi disciplinary team drawn from senior technical management of other units would constitute the audit team for the particular unit. 
 
External Audits 
As distinct from the above mentioned in-company teams, many companies are now getting independent, third party, external audit done. In India, such external audits are being done by the following types of organizations: 
a) Government
Central and Regional Labour Institutes of the organisation. 
b) Public Sector Undertakings  
Leading engineering consultancy organizations in the Public Sector like Engineers India Limited (EIL), FACT Engineering & Design Organisation (FEDO) are some well-known organisations in the field. 
c) Semi-Government/Autonomous Body/Professional Associations 
National Safety Council,  
d)  Private Consultants  
Private companies are doing work in the field. ​

Relative Merits & Demerits of Audits: 
 
a) External Audit 
The main benefit of such audit is that they are third party and therefore relatively free from bias and give a independent professional evaluation to the top management of the safety status of the plant. Further, when such audits are carried out by government and semi-government agencies or professional /public sector consultancies they are backed by the status and professional expertise of these organizations which is often helpful to the plant management, to demonstrate to the corporate management or statutory that “all is well”. 
Such agencies have a wide range of experience of auditing across different companies and industrial sectors as well as across different plants within a particular industry. They also have better knowledge of statutory provisions, and non-statutory standards as well as prevalent good practices being followed in industry. They are therefore able to bring to their findings the best possible recommendations.
Some limitations however arise from the fact that their recommendations may be more general and may not deal with the peculiarities and constraints of implementation of the company audited. Further, their knowledge about what is going on in a particular plant will be limited to the information fed to them by the management which may not be complete for a variety of reasons.    On the other hand, such constraints are less experienced by in-company auditors. 

b) Internal Audits 
Such teams are sometimes constrained by the fact that their experience is limited to their particular plant/company/industry. Further their knowledge of statutory provisions and non-statutory standards may also be relatively limited. Such limited experience also could lead to an unwillingness to accept changes and in some cases due to an “impossible to implement” approach.
 
On the other hand, in-company audit teams have greater familiarity with the specific technology in use, company practices and work culture particularly in relation to the company's safety standards and programmes. Their long years of experience and detailed knowledge of their companies‟ operations helps them to probe much better than external auditors, particularly in relation to accidents/hazards that have occurred at other locations within the company. Further by virtue of their specific experience in the company, they may be able to give greater details in their recommendations which would facilitate implementation. 
However, one limitation with teams from one unit visiting other unit is that they may refrain from offering critical comments. 

Methodology & Techniques of Collecting Information for Conducting Safety Audit:
Safety Audit, its importance and its relevance in the present context has been very well emphasized in the other presentations made earlier for this programme. In view of the fact, that the importance of this programme of action is getting recognition for several purposes like ISO certification, financial institutions etc., it is imperative that the audit findings are authentic. To make the audit findings authentic and acceptable to the persons/agencies concerned, carrying out the audit must rely on authentic information collected and the auditors must know the sources from   where information should be collected and the method of collecting such information. With this in view, the details relating to the sources from and method of, collecting information are discussed in the following paragraphs. 
Strategies involved in the collection of information for Safety Audit 
The Financial Audit, bases its reliability on the records viz. the books of accounts and the systems and procedures for incurring expenditure as well as the method of recording the same. Likewise for Safety Audit, the source for collecting information and its authenticity are very essential. Accordingly the following strategy is being adopted for collecting information. 

1. Physical observation and collecting of data by actual visit to the plant facilities. 
2. Verification of records pertaining to testing, examination, inspection, production, maintenance etc.  
3. The information collected as per the above two methods will have to be cross checked wherever necessary for there will be instances wherein a physical verification did not support facts gathered from the records. Likewise, the physical conditions and the level of safety obtaining at site might not have also been reflected appropriately in the records. Therefore in order to be as objective as possible, it is necessary to cross check the facts gathered by plant visits and facts as recorded in the records. 
4. Since systems and procedures and its adaptation are not only revealed by physical visits or records but also by the knowledge of persons who are operating the plants, it is essential that the discussion of the auditor with the plant personnel becomes one of the important strategies. Information so collected from this source is equally important. The importance of this source and strategy can be further explained through this example. If the records of the management indicates that key operating personnel are put through induction Safety training and such information is supported by the affirmation of the representatives of management personnel, the effectiveness of training need to be identified by actual discussion with the key operating personnel like crane operator or plant operator and their knowledge gained through training must be checked. Hence discussion with plant personnel is one of the important strategies. 
5. While the information collected through the three methods discussed above, would be audited against statutory requirements, safe operational practices, plant safety standards etc. there may be areas/situations which needs to be commented upon by the auditor for its adequacy of safety and the level of safety measures. This will have to be done by professional judgment of the auditor for which the experience and objectivity of the auditor are essential. Therefore, this strategy would be adopted as a last step in the strategies. This step will be adopted, rather restricted to, situations which are not covered by statutory requirements, codes of practices or plant safety standards. 

Checklist Method: 
   Safety Audit bases its approach to the collection of information on a detailed and comprehensive check list which is developed for assessing the safety level and its adequacy on various aspects. These safety aspects are considered as „Audit Elements‟. Whenever a safety aspect is to be audited, the concerned element is given a title such as „Safety Management and Leadership‟, „Safety Training‟, „Storage and Handling‟, „Housekeeping‟ etc. Considerable skill and thinking would have to be involved in preparing the check list or questionnaire as is applicable for each and every audit element. 
The checklist or questionnaire so prepared shall facilitate the auditor to assess the level of safety, compliance details, adequacy of safety measures in respect of each and every audit element in a comprehensive manner. To bring out all the relevant details necessary for this purpose, several questions will have to be prepared for the same subject or audit element which will be called sub-elements.  Thus, when questions/checklist connected with an audit element and its sub-elements are developed properly, information collected in the form of answers or details should enable the auditor to know all that needs to be known about the audit element in question. Hence the manner in which questions should be prepared for each audit element and its sub-elements is briefly discussed. 
To start with, it should be ascertained whether the policy covering the Safety Aspects  which  is  sought  to  be audited  as  audit  element  under  consideration  is  available. For each and every safety aspect the organization must have the policy. Whether it is „Safety and Purchase‟ or and „Investigation of an accident‟ or any aspect of work, there will be a policy, either written or unwritten but followed as a convention guiding the activity relating to that aspect. The audit is only trying to elicit information as to whether there is a policy which guides the activities for that safety element. At times, it is felt by some people as to how there could be a policy in regard to aspects like „Safety and Purchase‟, Safety Training‟, „Investigation of an accident‟ etc. For example an organization should have a clear cut policy as to what type of accidents should be investigated, by whom it should be investigated, whether it should be done by a Committee or an individual, how soon it should be investigated etc. These details cover the policy of the organization with regard to „Investigation of an accident‟. The audit is trying to find out whether the organization has got such a policy and if the policy is available the adequacy of the policy in terms of the content coverage will be commented upon. If not available a recommendation to the above effect will be given. Therefore, in every questionnaire that is developed, the policy of the organization relating to that particular safety aspect which is sought to be audited by the element would be the first safety audit sub-element. The „other sub-elements‟ of the checklist or questionnaire should bring out further information on the methods, measures and arrangements available for implementing the policy. The latter part of the questionnaire would be checking the adequacy of arrangements for ascertaining as to how the policy will be implemented and whether the systems available are sound system. The next step in the preparation of the checklist would be to check the extent to which the systems and procedures are being implemented and its effectiveness. In checking this, the strategies discussed earlier would in relevant. 
 This method of collecting information based on a prepared questionnaire/check list for each and every audit element covering different safety aspects is very helpful in many ways. In fact the checklist/questionnaire serves the purpose of constituting the main basis on which information is collected by almost all types of Safety Audits. It gives the auditor a direction and enables him to follow a structured and planned approach for the collection of information. It also takes care of continuity whenever interruptions are there. It will avoid repetition and back-tracking. Therefore the extent to which time is spent and care is exercised in the preparation of questionnaire/checklist for various audit-elements ensures the success of the audit, its authenticity and its effectiveness. The more detailed the questionnaire is, the less time the auditor would spend in coming to a reasonable conclusion which would be as authentic as possible. 

Information Collection from Records: 
          As mentioned earlier, assessing the extent of safety compliance through records is one strategy. It is also equally one of the important sources where from information relating to safety could be collected. Whenever „Records‟ is mentioned, it is generally held impression that „records‟ mean only records pertaining to Safety inspections, testing or examination of plant and equipment required to be maintained as per statues or maintained as per the initiative of the plant. An auditor who is desirous of making an in-depth and objective assessment of safety would not only rely or restrict, his collection of information from records relating to safety but also from other records as well. Hence the types of records which can be considered as useful sources of information for an auditor carrying out safety audit would be the following: 
1. Records pertaining to Safety Inspection Testing and examination maintained either for meeting statutory requirements or on the initiative of the plant.
2. Accident Register/Reports 
3. First Aid Reports
4. Production logs, particularly portion relating to delays due to malfunction of equipment/device failure of equipment/accessories including process interruptions.
5. Records relating to tool issues and consumption pattern of raw material.
6. Maintenance Records
7. Manufacturer's instructions, Machine Manuals etc. 
It can be seen from the above listing that they can be safety and records though not maintained solely for safety but yet would constitute useful source from where information relating to safety could be derived or elicited. Hence an auditor who is keen to make an objective and truthful assessment would use all the above sources in a judicious manner. The manner in which the second category of records would be useful for safety related information can be understood and appreciated from the foregoing brief discussion. 
For example if one were to audit one of the important elements “Operational Safety Aspects” one can neither restrict oneself to the Operational Safety Manual nor ignore the other reliable source namely the production logs. The production logs would contain time wise records of events, production levels or reaction parameters in a process industry, causes of delays and interruptions, failure of any operation device or accessories, reasons for the quality degradation, malfunction of critical component of plant and machinery etc. From this, the following information could be derived or conclusion drawn. 
If a critical component fails, the cause of failure will have safety implications besides the operational problems. Further, the maintenance records and records relating to plant/equipment could be used for cross referencing for drawing useful conclusions about the system of purchase, maintenance etc. Thus valuable information relating to operational safety aspects could be derived from all these records. For instance, if the records relating to testing and examination of pressure vessels indicated de-rating the capacity of the vessel in the opinion of the „Competent Person, then the auditor need to also check whether the vessel has been used accordingly in the process. He also needs to check whether the pressure relief arrangements are set according to the de-rated capacity. Then only he can come to an authentic conclusion about the operational safety aspects involving the use of a pressure vessel. By way of one more example the following would illustrate this principle further. While auditing operational safety requirements it is not only enough if it is checked whether the machine operator is trained to perform sage work but it is equally important to check the systems of work, issue of tools, purchase of tools etc. to arrive at a reasonable conclusions about „Operational Safety‟. The tool issue records reveal the quantum of issue, number of breakages, details about breakages etc. Thus, the auditor will have to refer all relevant records and sources of information for coming to reasonable conclusion for making an objective assessment. 
 
Discussion with Plant Personnel: 
The third source as well as the strategy of an auditor is to supplement the information collected from the records as well from personal observations made at site. The information elicited from discussion with plant personnel is regardless of the level. For instance discussions can be had from Operating Manager to know the extent of importance they give and efforts they put in to integrate safety with their day to day work. Similarly the discussion with Supervisors can be used for ascertaining the manner in which they supervise the safe behavior of Operating Personnel, obtain compliance with safety rules and the aspects of their day to day work on which they integrate safety in their work. Likewise, discussions can be had from operating personnel to ascertain their knowledge about safety aspects, Safety Rules, toxicity data of hazardous substances, the precautions they should observe while at work. The details of information so collected would be used not only for auditing one audit element but also for more than one element. The knowledge of safety rules, elicited from discussion can be useful while auditing the element „Plant Safety Rules and „Procedures‟ and „Safety Training‟. Thus, the information collected from the discussion with the same person would be useful for two audit elements. 

Professional Judgement: 
The fourth source or the strategy is collecting information for the audit by using professional judgment. As objectivity which the auditor brings to bear on his judgment, is likely to be doubted this source is used to the minimum extent. Nevertheless, the auditor cannot completely avoid collecting through this source as in some situations this source or method is the only means available. For example, if an auditor desires to collect information under the audit element, ‟Operational Safety‟ about the extent to which pant, machinery or equipment are having guards, protection devices etc. he has to use his professional judgment as a means of confirmatory test-by making random sampling. Prior to this confirmatory test, the auditor would have audited the other sub-elements relating to this aspect the like the system of maintenance of machine guards, cross checked it with the records pertaining to maintenance, and would have elicited further information from the discussions with the plant personnel. He has to finally confirm the completeness of the efforts by ascertaining the actual position obtaining in the plant for which resorting to the use of professional judgment cannot be avoided. In  any plant, the number of such equipment/machinery requiring to be checked for this purpose would be many and in such situations actual count would be quite consuming and „random sampling‟ for this purpose. The professional capability of the auditor and whether the samples selected by him are representative of the actual position are aspects failing within the realm of professional judgment. Hence, the auditor reserves this method of collecting information to the minimum extent necessary. 
To further illustrate this point, one can take up the conditional aspects of plant and machinery, particularly from the point of view of safety. If the records and the systems indicate that the periodic inspections are being carried out confirmatory assessment have to be made using professional judgment. Conditions like corrosion, erosion, rust, wear and tear etc. and the extent to which these conditions would have safety implications are areas which fall within the ambit of professional judgment. Obviously, the auditor would not checking theses aspects on each and every item of equipment or plant or machinery but he will make a random assessment using professional judgment. 
 
Conclusion:  
In conclusion, it has to be pointed out that collecting information for the purpose of Safety Audit would have to be carefully thought out, well planned, and meticulously carried out exercise which should be as objective as possible. In doing this, an auditor need to have an undertaking about the process, plant have a preliminary discussion with the plant personnel during which time he would explain the system of audit to the heads of sections of department and get a feed back about their plant systems and practice. He would also explain to them as to how they would have to co-operate with him and interact with him. He could also during the preliminary discussion time decide on the safety aspects which would be taken up for auditing. Aimed with the details collected during the preliminary discussion, the auditor would then proceed to carefully/prepare the checklist/questionnaire for each and every element and then take up the detailed audit. 

Safety Management Systems: 
Basic principles of Safety Management System can be described as under:
 
Principle 1: “An unsafe act, an unsafe condition and an accident are all symptoms of something wrong in the management system”. This principle suggests that we should not boil down our findings to a single factor but should widen them to include as many factors as seem applicable. Every accident opens a window through which we can observe the system, the procedure, etc. Different accidents would reveal similar things that might be wrong in the same management systems.
 
Principle 2 : “We can predict that certain sets of circumstances will produce severe injuries. These circumstances can be identified and controlled”. A number of recent studies suggest that severe injuries are fairly predictable in certain situations such as unusual and non-routine work, non-production activities, sources of high energy etc. Management system should identify and highlight the inherent hazards and institute a system to control them.
 
Principle 3 : “Safety should be managed like any other company function. Management should direct the safety effort by setting achievable goals and by planning, organization and controlling to achieve them”. This principle restates the thought that safety is analogous with quality, cost and quantity of production. It also goes further and brings safety in to management function. Inherent in this principle is the fact that safety is and must be a line function. As management directs its effort by goal setting, planning, controlling, assigning responsibility to line management and granting them authority to accomplish results in various fields, the same should be done for safety. 

Principle 4 : “The key to effective line safety performance is management procedures that fix accountability”. Any line manager will achieve results in those areas in which he is being measured by the management. “The concept of accountability” is important for this measurement and the lack of procedures for fixing accountability is safety‟s greatest failing. A person who is held accountable will accept the given responsibility. In most cases someone who is not held accountable will not accept responsibility; he will devote the most of his attention to the things that management is measuring: production, quality, cost or any other area in which management is currently exerting pressure. 

Principle 5 : “The function of safety is to locate and define operational errors that allow accidents to occur. This can be carried out in two ways:
(1) by asking why accidents happen-searching for their root causes, and
(2) by asking whether certain non-effective controls are being utilized”.

It suggests that to accomplish our purposes, we in safety would do well to search out not only what is wrong with the people but by searching what is wrong with the management system. This concept directs safety professional to scrutinize the management system instead of merely looking at unsafe act and unsafe condition. 
 
Some of the Important Aspects of Safety Management System 
Based upon the principles mentioned above, some of the important aspects of safety management system are:

Safety Policy:
It is the starting point for all the activities in a safety programme. If the principle “safety is a line responsibility” is true, it is important that not only we, as safety people, believe it but also the line organization believe it. The line organization will believe that safety is its responsibility only when safety is definitely assigned to them by the management. Another principle mentioned above states that “management should direct the safety efforts by setting safety goals and by planning, organizing and controlling to achieve them”. Safety policy is management‟s expression of direction to be followed in this regard. It is only through safety policy that the worker will know managements desire concerning safety. A safety policy should be in return form and should be well publicized. This is also one of the requirements under Section 7A (3) of the factories Act. 1948. Apart from mentioning the management‟s intentions towards safety it should necessarily cover the methodology to be followed for fulfilling such intentions. IT should definitely specify who is responsible for what search as the responsibilities of line managers, supervisors, foreman etc. towards safety. Safety policy should also mention how accountability towards safety and safety performance of people at various levels will be measured and extent of authority given at various levels for fulfilling responsibilities towards safety. Safety policy should also emphasize the importance of various safety committees constituted „or to be constituted‟ and the manner in which they are expected to function. It should also spell out various safety standards, rules, regulations and codes of practice that the company should necessarily abide by.

 
Safety Organization:

One of the important functions of safety management system is safety organization. Section 40-B of the Factories Act, 1948 also requires that every factory wherein 1000 or more workers are ordinarily employed, should have qualified safety officer(s). Obviously since the line had primary safety responsibility, the safety specialist (or whatever title is used) is and must be a staff function and is not directly responsible for safety results. His job responsibilities involve activities which help the line achieve the goal in  safety. The safety specialist had no authority over the line. He may have a great deal of influence but this is quite different from authority. In order to make safety specialist influential, it is important that he reports directly to the top Executive and is given proper status.
The safety professional in any organization obtains results by using either of the two methods:
(1) Makes a recommendation to line executive who issue an order
(2) obtaining acceptance of his suggestion voluntarily from line supervisors without taking the chain of command route. More often than not, the purpose of safety specialists is accomplished by the second method. 
 
Safety Committees:
Safety Committees are extremely common in industries today. Such committees can perform important task of motivating and involving people in safety. But such committee can be effective only when their duties and responsibilities are clearly assigned to the committee and chairperson is carefully chosen. It is most important that the findings and recommendations of such committees are recorded and implemented within a time frame.  
Accident reporting, Investigation and record keeping:
 
It is one of the important parts of the safety management system to report and investigate the accidents. It is also one of the requirements under Section 88 of the Factories Act, 1948 that the occurrence of reportable accidents and certain dangerous occurrence should be notified to the Inspector of Factories. Accident reporting and investigation should invariably start from the Foremen/Supervisor and line managers concerned. Safety specialist should be involved in investigation should of serious and fatal accident. In all cases the accident investigation should aim at tracing all the contributing factors to determine their underlining causes instead of only being fault finding. 
Apart from reporting accidents to Inspector of Factories, which is a legal requirement, it is equally or rather more important that the Chief Execution of the organization is   kept well informed about the accident records and their investigation reports. This can be done by sending him a monthly report which should necessarily include: 
1. Frequency rate of accident.
2. Severity rate of accidents.
3. Total time lost due to accidents.
4. Cost of the accidents.
5. Findings
6. Action recommended to avoid reoccurrence. 

These should be given not only for the company as a whole but also for each individual plant or department. Such presentations would often convince the supervisor or line managers of the desirability of devoting his attention more actively to the prevention of accidents than he had in the past/ 
Apart from reporting and recording reportable accidents it is extremely important that accidents of minor nature should also be recorded. The accident that results in a minor injury (or no-injury) today, may cause serious injury or even death of a worker tomorrow. Because of this, the safety programme should make if necessary to record and study as many accidents as possible even though some accidents resulted in minor injury, or no-injury.