
What is Blasting?
Abrasive grit blasting, or sand blast cleaning, is a surface treatment process widely used in a variety of different industries with many diverse purposes. Abrasive blasting is the process by which an abrasive media is accelerated through a blasting nozzle by means of compressed air.

Glossary of Blasting Terms:-
Air Blast: - the airborne shock wave or acoustic transient generated by an explosion. 
Ammonium Nitrate: - The ammonium salt of nitric acid represented by the NH4NO3. 
Ampere: - A unit of electrical current produced by 1 volt acting through a resistance of 1 ohm. 
ANFO: - An explosive material ideally consisting of 94% ammonium nitrate and 6% fuel oil by weight.  ANFO is used as a blasting agent. 
Artificial Barricade: - An artificial mound or revetted wall of earth of a minimum thickness of 3 ft. 
Back Break: - Rock broken beyond the limits of the rear row of holes in a blast pattern. 
Barricaded: - The effective screening of a building containing explosives from a magazine or other building, railway, or highway by a natural or an artificial barrier.  A straight line from the top of any sidewall of the building containing explosives to the eave line of any magazine or other building or to a point 12 ft above the center of a railway or highway shall pass through such barrier. 
Base Charge: - The main explosive charge in the base of a detonator. 
Bench: - The horizontal ledge in an excavation or mining operation along which holes are drilled vertically. 
Binary Explosive: - An explosive prepared by mixing 2 non-explosive materials which when combined form a cap-sensitive explosive 
Blast: - The action of breaking and displacing rock by means of explosives.  SHOT also means blast. 
Blast Area: - The area of a blast within the influence of flying rock missiles, gases, and concussion. 
Blast Site: - The immediate area where the blast holes are located and explosive materials are handled during loading of the shot. 
Blaster: - That licensed, qualified person in charge of, and responsible for the loading and firing of a blast. 
Blasting Agent: - A material or mixture consisting of a fuel and oxidizer used for blasting, but not classified as a high explosive, in which none of the ingredients are classified as an explosive.  The finished product is not cap-sensitive. 
Blasting Cap: - (see detonators) - A metallic tube closed at one end, containing a charge of one or more detonating compounds, and designed to initiate detonation. 
Blasting Galvanometer: - An electrical resistance instrument designed specifically for testing electric detonators and circuits containing them.  Along with blasting ohmmeters and blaster's multimeters, it is used to measure resistance or to check electrical continuity.   
Blast Hole: - A hole drilled in rock or other material for the placement of explosive. 
Blaster Log: - A written record of information about a specific blast as maybe required by law or regulation. 
Blasting Machine: - An electrical or electromechanical device that provides electrical energy for the purpose of energizing detonators in an electric blasting circuit. 
Black Hole: - A hole drilled into a boulder to allow the placement of an explosive charge. 
Blasting Vibration: - The energy from a blast that manifests itself in airborne and earth borne vibrations that are transmitted through the earth and atmosphere away from the immediate blast site. 
Blend: - A mixture consisting of (a) A water-based explosive material matrix and ammonium nitrate or ANFO; or (b) A water-based oxidizer matrix and ammonium nitrate or ANFO. 
Booster: - An explosive charge, usually of high strength and high detonation velocity, used to improve the initiation of less sensitive explosive materials. 
Bridgewire: - A resistance wire connecting the ends of the legwires inside an electric detonator and which is imbedded in the ignition charge of the detonator. 
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (BATF): - A bureau of the Department of Treasury having responsibility for the promulgation and enforcement of regulations related to the unlawful use of explosive materials. 
Burden: - The distance in feet from an explosive charge, in the direction of relief, to the nearest free or open face. 
Bus Wire: - Expendable heavy-gauge bare copper wire used detonators or series of detonators in parallel. 
Cap Crimper: - A mechanical device for crimping the metallic shell of a fuse detonator or igniter cord connector securely to a section of inserted safety fuse.  A mechanical device for crimping the metallic shell of detonator. 
Cap Sensitivity: - An explosive material is considered to e cap sensitive if it detonates with an IME No. 8 Test Detonator. 
Capacitor-Discharge Blasting Machine: - A blasting machine in which electrical energy, stored on a capacitor, is discharged into a blasting circuit containing electric detonators.   
Cartridge: - An individual closed shell, bag, or tube of circular cross section containing explosive material. 
Cartridge Count (Stick Count): - The number of cartridges in a standard case.  A standard case typically contains about 50 lb of explosive material. 
Cartridge Punch: - A wooden, plastic, or non sparking metallic device used to punch an opening in an explosive cartridge to accept a detonator or a section of detonating cord. 
Case: - An outer substantial shipping container meeting DOT specifications for explosive materials. 
Case Insert: - A set of printed, precautionary instructions, including the IME Do's and Don'ts, which is inserted into a case of explosive materials. 
Cast, Extrude, or Pressed Booster: - A cast, extruded, or pressed solid high explosive used to detonate less sensitive explosive materials. 
Circuit: - A completed path for conveying electrical current. 
Commercial Explosives: - Explosives designed, produced, and used for commercial or industrial applications rather than for military purposes. 
Connecting Wire: - Wire used to extend the firing line or leg wires in an electric blasting circuit. 
Continuity Check (Circuit Continuity Check): - A determination made by instrumentation where possible, and visually in all cases, show that an initiation system in continuous and contains no breaks or improper connections that could cause stoppage or failure of the initiation process. 
Core Load: - The explosive core of detonating cord, expressed as the number of grains of explosive per foot. 
Crimp: - The folded ends of paper explosive cartridge, the circumferential depression at the open end of a fuse cap or igniter cord connector that serves to secure the fuse; or the circumferential depression in the blasting cap shell that secures a sealing plug or sleeve into electric or non electric detonators. 
Crimping: - The act of securing a fuse cap or igniter cord connector to a section of a safety fuse by compressing the metal shell of the cap against the fuse by means of a cap crimper. 
Cushion Blasting: - The technique of firing a single row of holes along a neat excavation line to shear the web between the closely drilled holes. 
Cutoff: - A break in a path of detonation or initiation caused by extraneous interference, such as flyrock or shifting ground. 
Date-Shift-Code: - A code applied by manufacturers to the outside shipping containers, and, in many instances, to the immediate containers of explosive materials to aid in their identification and tracing. 
DC: - Direct current. 
Decibel: - A unit of air overpressure commonly used to measure air blast. 
Deflagration: - An explosive reaction such as a rapid combustion that moves through an explosive material at a velocity less than the speed of sound in the material. 
Delay: - A distinct pause of predetermined time between detonation or initiation impulses, to permit the firing of explosive charges separately. 
Delay Detonator: - An electric or nonelectric detonator used to introduce a predetermined lapse of time between the application of a firing signal and the detonation of the base charge. 
Delay Element: - The device in a delay detonator that produces the predetermined time lapse between the application of a firing signal and detonation. 
Delay Interval: - The nominal time between the detonations of delay detonators of adjacent periods in a delay series; the nominal time between successive detonations in a blast. 
Delay Series: - A series of delay detonators designed to satisfy specific blasting requirements.  There are basically two types of delay series:  millisecond (MS) with delay intervals on the order of milliseconds, and long period (LP) with delay times on the order of seconds. 
Delay Tag: - A tag, band, or marker on a delay detonator that denotes the delay series, delay period, and /or delay time of the detonator. 
Delay Time: - The lapse of time between the application of a firing signal and the detonation of the base charge of a delay detonator. 
Density: - The mass of an explosive per unit of volume, usually expressed in grams per cubic centimeter or pounds per cubic foot. 
DEP: - Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. Aka, the Department. 
Department of Transportation (DOT): - A cabinet-level agency of the federal government.  It has the responsibility for the comprehensive regulation of transportation safety and issues regulations governing interstate shipments of explosives and other hazardous materials. 
Detonating Cord: - A flexible cord containing a center core of high explosive and used to initiate other explosives. 
Detonating Cord MS Connectors: - Non electric, short-interval (millisecond) delay devices for use in delaying blasts that are initiated by detonating cord. 
Detonating Cord Trunkline: - The line of detonating cord that is used to connect and initiate other lines of detonating cord.  Detonating cord trunkline must be buried. 
Detonating Primer: - A name applied for transportation purposes to a device consisting of a detonator and an additional charge of explosives, assembled as a unit. 
Detonation: - An explosive reaction that moves through an explosive material at a velocity greater than the speed of sound in the material. 
Detonation Velocity: - The velocity at which a detonation progresses through an explosive. 
Detonator: - Any device containing any initiating or primary explosive that is used for initiating detonation.  A detonator may not contain more than 10 grams of total explosives by weight, excluding ignition or delay charges.  The term includes, but is not limited to, electric blasting caps of instantaneous and delay types, blasting caps for use with safety fuses, detonating cord delay connectors, and nonelectric instantaneous and delay blasting caps that use detonating cord, shock tube, or any other replacement for electric legwires 
Donor: - An exploding charge producing an impulse that impinges upon an explosive "acceptor" charge. 
Electric Blasting Circuit: - An electric circuit containing electric detonators and associated wiring. 
Electric Detonator: - A detonator designed for, and capable of, initiation by means of an electric current. 
Electronic Programmable Detonators: - Blasting caps that are variably and individually programmable. 
Emulsion: - An explosive material containing substantial amounts of oxidizers dissolved in water droplets, surrounded by an immiscible fuel. 
Energy: - A measure of the potential for the explosive to do work. 
Explode: - To react chemically to a rapid manner to produce heat and pressure.  The term encompasses both deflagration and detonation. 
Explosion: - A chemical reaction involving an extremely rapid expansion of gases, usually with the liberation of heat. 
Explosive: - Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion. 
Explosive Materials: - These include explosives, blasting agents, and detonators.  The term includes, but is not limited to, dynamite and other high explosives; slurries, emulsions, and water gels; black powder and pellet powder; initiating explosives; detonators (blasting caps); safety fuse; squibs; detonating cord; igniter cord; and igniters. 
Explosive Strength: - The amount of energy released by an explosive upon detonation that is an indication of the capacity of the explosive to do work. 
Extraneous Electricity: - Electrical energy, other than actual firing current or the test current from a blasting galvanometer, that is present at a blast site and that could enter an electric blasting circuit.  It includes stray current, static electricity, RF (electro-magnetic) waves, and time-varying electric and magnetic fields 
Fire Extinguisher Rating: - A rating set forth in the National Fire Code that may be identified on an extinguisher by a number (5,20,30, etc.) indicating the extinguisher's relative effectiveness followed by a letter (A, B, C, etc.) indicating the class or classes of fires for which the extinguisher has been found to be effective.  
Fire-Resistant: - Construction designed to offer reasonable protection against fire. 
Firing Current: - An electric current of recommended magnitude and duration to sufficiently energize an electric detonator or a circuit of electric detonators. 
Firing Line: - The wire(s) connecting the electrical power source with the electric blasting circuit. 
Flammability: - The ease with which an explosive material may be ignited by flame and heat. 
Flyrock: - Rocks or any other debris propelled from the blast area by the force of an explosion. 
Frequency: - The number of vibration waves that pass through a given point during one second, measured in Hertz (Hz) aka cycles per second. 
Fuel: - A substance that may react with oxygen to produce combustion. 
Fumes: - The gaseous products of an explosion.  For the purpose of fume classification, only poisonous or toxic gases, such as carbon monoxide, hydrogen sulfide, and nitrogen oxides are considered. 
Gauge (Wire): - A series of standard sizes such as the American Wire Gauge (AWG), used to specify the diameter of wire. 
Galvanometer (See Blasting Galvanometer) 
Gap Sensitivity: - The maxim distance for propagation between standard charge sizes of explosive donor and acceptor. 
Ground Fault: - An electrical contact between part of the blasting circuit and earth. 
Ground Vibration: - Shaking of the ground, by elastic waves emanating from a blast, usually measured in inches per second of particle velocity. 
Hangfire: - The detonation of an explosive charge at some non-determined time after its normally designed firing time. 
Hardwood: - Red oak, white oak, hard maple, ash, or hickory, free from loose knots, windshakes, or similar defects. 
Heading: - Refers to the driving of openings of the various exploration and development passageways. 
Hertz (Hz): - synonym for "cycles per second" 
High Explosives: - Explosives that are characterized by a very high rate of reaction, high-pressure development, and the presence of a detonation wave in the explosive. 
IME-22 Container (Compartment): - A container (portable), or a compartment (permanently affixed to a vehicle), which is constructed in accordance with IME SLP-22 specifications and is authorized by the Department of Transportation for the transport of certain types of detonators on the same vehicle with other explosives. 
Incendivity: - The property of an igniting agent (e.g., spark, flame, or hot solid) whereby the agent can cause ignition. 
Inhabited Building: - A building regularly occupied in whole or part as a habitation for human beings or any church, schoolhouse, railroad station, store, or other structure where people are accustomed to assemble, except any building or structure occupied in connection with the manufacture, transportation, storage, or use of explosive materials.  
Initiation: - The act of causing an explosive material to detonate or deflagrate. 
Initiator: - A detonator or detonating cord used to start detonation in an explosive material. 
Institute of Makers of Explosives No. 8 Test Detonator: - IME No.8 test detonator has 0.40 - 0.45 g of PETN base charge pressed to a specific gravity of 1.4 g/cc and primed with standard weights of primer, depending on manufacturer. 
Inventory: - A listing of all explosive materials stored in a magazine. 
Lead Line or Leading Wires: - The wire(s) connecting the electrical power source with the circuit containing electric detonators. 
Leakage Resistance: - The resistance between the blasting circuit (including lead wires) and the ground. 
Leg wires: - The two single wires or one duplex wire extending out from an electric detonator. 
Lift Shot: - A blast that is confined on all sides and has no free face to provide relief. 
Liquid Fuels: - Fuels in a liquid state.  They may be used with oxidizers to form explosive materials. 
Loading: - Placing explosive material in a blasthole or against the material to be blasted. 
Loading factor: - Weight of explosive per foot in a borehole. (Can be determined by .34 x Borehole diameter squared X density of explosives product). 
Low Explosive: - Explosives that are characterized by deflagration or a low rate of reaction and the development of low pressure. 
Magazine: - Any building, structure, or container, other than an explosives manufacturing building, approved for the storage of explosive material. 
Main Explosive Charge: - The explosive material that performs the major work of blasting. 
Manufacturing Codes: - Code markings stamped on explosive materials packages, indicating, among other information, the date of manufacture. 
Mass Detonate (Mass Explode): - Explosive materials mass detonate (mass explode) when a unit or any part of a larger quantity of explosive material explodes and causes all or a substantial part of the remaining material to detonate or explode simultaneously.  With respect to detonators, "a substantial part" means 90% or more. 
Mat: - Used to cover a blast to hold down ejected debris, usually made of woven wire cable or rope. 
Maximum Recommended Firing Current: - The highest recommended electric current to ensure safe and effective performance of an electric detonator. 
Millisecond: - One thousandth of a second. 
Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA): - An agency of the Department of Labor concerned with promulgation and enforcement of health and safety regulations in the mining field. 
Misfire: - A blast that fails to detonate completely after an attempt at initiation; also the explosive material itself that failed to detonate as planned. 
MS Connectors: - Nonelectric, short-interval (millisecond) delay devices for use in delaying blasts that are initiated by detonating cord. 
Mud Capping: - (sometimes known as "bulldozing", "adobe blasting", or "dobying") The breaking of boulders by placing a quantity of explosives against a rock or boulder without confining the explosives in a drill hole. 
Natural Barricade: - Natural features of the ground, such as hills, or timber of sufficient density that the surrounding exposures that require protection cannot be seen from the magazine when the trees are bare of leaves. 
Non electric Detonator: - A detonator that does not require the use of electric energy or safety fuse to function. 
Non sparking Metal: - A metal that will not produce a spark when struck with other tools, rock, or hard surfaces. 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA): - An agency of the Department of Labor active in eliminating occupational hazards and promoting employee health and safety. 
Oxidizer or Oxidizing Material: - A substance, such as a nitrate, that readily yields oxygen or other oxidizing substances to stimulate the combustion of organic matter or other fuel. 
Parallel Blasting Circuit: - An electric blasting circuit in which the legwires of each detonator are connected across the firing line directly or through buswire. 
Particle Velocity: - A measure of the intensity of ground vibration, specifically the time rate of change of the amplitude of ground vibration. 
PETN: - An abbreviation for the name of the explosive, pentaerythritol - tetranitrate. 
Placards: - Signs placed on vehicles transporting hazardous materials (including explosive materials) indicating the nature of the cargo. 
Powder: - A generic term describing any explosive. 
Powder Column: - A continuous length of explosives loaded into a borehole. 
Powder Factor: - The ratio of weight of explosive to tons or cubic yards of material blasted. 
Premature Firing: - The detonation of an explosive charge before the intended time. 
Pre-Blast Survey: - An inspection and documentation of the condition of a structure prior to blasting. 
Pre-Splitting: - Stress relief involving a single row of holes drilled along a neat excavation line, where detonation of explosives in the holes causes shearing of the web or rock between the holes.  Pre-split holes may be fired in advance of production holes. 
Prilled Ammonium Nitrate: - Ammonium nitrate in a pelleted or prilled form. 
Primary Explosive: - A sensitive explosive that nearly always detonates by simple ignition from such means as spark, flame, impact, friction, or other primary heat sources of appropriate magnitude. 
Primer: - A unit, package, or cartridge of explosives used to initiate other explosives or blasting agents, and which contains: 1.) A detonator, or 2.) Detonating cord to which is attached a detonator designed to initiate the detonating cord. 
Propagation: - The detonation of explosive charges by an impulse received from adjacent or nearby explosive charges. 
Quantity-distance: - A table-listing minimum recommended distances from explosive materials stores of various weights to a specific location. 
Receptor (Acceptor): - A charge of explosive materials receiving an impulse from an exploding donor charge. 
Resistance: - The measure of opposition to the flow of electrical current, expressed in ohms. 
Seismograph: - An instrument, useful in monitoring blasting operations, that records ground vibration.  Particle velocity, displacement, or acceleration is generally measured and recorded in three mutually perpendicular directions. 
Sensitiveness: - A measure of an explosive's cartridge-to-cartridge propagating ability under certain test conditions.  It is expressed as the distance through air at which a primed half-cartridge (donor) will detonate an unprimed half-cartridge (receptor). 
Sensitivity: - A physical characteristic of an explosive material classifying its ability to be initiated upon receiving an external impulse such as impact, shock, flame, friction, or other influences that can cause explosive decomposition. 
Separation Distances: - Minimum recommended distances from explosive materials accumulations to certain specific locations. 
Series Blasting Circuit: - An electric blasting circuit that provides one continuous path for the current through all caps in the circuit. 
Series in Parallel Blasting Circuit: - An electric blasting circuit in which the ends of two or more series of electric detonators are connected across the firing line directly or through buswire.  
Shelf Life: - The length of time of storage during which an explosive material retains adequate performance characteristics. 
Shock Wave: - A transient pressure pulse that propagates at supersonic velocity. 
Shunt: - The shorting together of the free ends of; 1.) Electric detonator legwires, or 2.) The wire ends of an electric blasting circuit or part there-of, the name of an electrical shorting device applied to the free ends of electric detonators by the manufacturer. 
Signs-Explosive (Placards): - Signs, called placards, placed on vehicles transporting explosives denoting the character of the cargo, or sins placed near storage areas as a warning to unauthorized personnel. 
Silver Chloride Cell: - A special battery of relatively low current output used in a blasting galvanometer. 
Specific Gravity: - The ratio of the weight of any volume of substance to the weight of an equal volume of pure water. 
Stability: - The ability of an explosive material to retain chemical and physical properties specified by the manufacturer when exposed to specific environmental conditions over a particular period of time. 
Static Electricity: - Electric charge at rest on a person or object.  It is most often produced by the contact and separation of dissimilar insulating materials. 
Storage: - The safekeeping of explosive materials, usually in specially designed structures called magazines. 
Stray Current: - A flow of electricity outside an insulated conductor system. 
Sympathetic Propagation: - The detonation of an explosive material as the result of receiving an impulse from another detonation through air, earth, or water. 
Theft-Resistant: - Construction designed to deter illegal entry into facilities used for the storage of explosive materials. 
Trunkline: - The line of detonating cord on the ground surface that connects detonating cord downlines. 
Volt: - The unit of electromotive force.  It is the difference in potential required to make a current of 1-ampere flow through a resistance of 1 ohm. 
Warning Signal: - A visual or audible signal that is used for warning personnel in the vicinity of the blast area of the impending explosion. 
Watt: - A unit of electrical power equal to 1 joule/second. 

​

Safety during Blasting:

Blast Area:
One of the greatest challenges, which a blaster faces in mining and construction blasting, is to accurately determine the bounds of the blast area.  This is particularly true in geologically disturbed rock.  A blaster’s decision in estimating the bounds of the blast area is greatly influenced by the engineering design of the blast, geology of the blast, regulatory requirements, and company policy.  Schneider [1995] stated that a blaster must make an estimate of the maximum possible distance flyrock could travel from a shot.  Furthermore, a blaster should not assume that a shot being fired will behave like other shots previously fired at the same operation.   
For surface and underground metal-nonmetal mines, Title 30 Code of Federal Regulations (30 CFR) § 56.2 and § 57.2 defines blast area as the area near blasting operations in which concussion or flying material may cause injury.  The following factors shall be considered to determine the blast area:
Geology or material to be blasted,
Blast pattern, 
Burden, depth, diameter, and angle of the holes,
Blasting experience of the mine,
Delay systems, powder factor, and pounds per delay,
Type and amount of explosive material, and
Type and amount of stemming. 
The Federal Office of Surface Mining (OSM) regulations [30 CFR § 816.67 and 817.67] help to characterize the bounds of the blast area by specifying that flyrock shall not be cast from the blasting site–
More than one-half the distance to the nearest dwelling or other occupied structure,
Beyond the area of control required under 30 CFR § 816.66(c), or
Beyond the permit boundary. 
Similar requirements are prescribed by many coal mining states such as Colorado, Illinois, Kentucky, New Mexico, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Utah, Virginia, West Virginia, and Wyoming.   
The bounds of a blast area should be adequately determined for each blast.  Flyrock could travel beyond an inadequately defined blast area and cause injury.  In Campbell County, TN, flyrock traveled beyond the blast area resulting in a fatal injury to a motorist traveling on interstate 75 [Shea & Clark, 1998].  The bounds of the blast area were not adequately determined for this blast.  In a coal mine blast, flyrock traveled 900 feet and landed beyond the permit boundary causing a fatal injury [MSHA, 1990a].  During a construction blasting operation near Marlboro, NY, flyrock was showered on passing motorists on Route 9 W about 180 feet from the blast pit.  This incident resulted in property damage and injury.  There are numerous instances where the bounds of the blast area were not accurately determined, resulting in injury, or property damage. There are many cases of close calls where accidents were narrowly missed.   
Blast area security in underground mines is much more complex than surface blasting.  It requires a thorough understanding of ventilation, roof characteristics, and the roof control plan of the mine.  The bounds of the blast area need to be adjusted accordingly.  Blasting could cause ground fall in adjacent entries, and exposure to smoke, dust, or toxic fumes.  All employees must be removed from such adjacent entries or other affected airways.  Post-blast roof fall and exposure to fumes have caused several accidents. 
Fundamental task-elements of a blast area security system:
A blast area security system is the means by which a mine operator prevents injury to people or damage to equipment when a scheduled blast is detonated [Fletcher & D’Andrea, 1987].  Most blasting accidents in surface and underground mines occur during scheduled blasting and are due to inadequate blast area security.  MSHA accident data reveal that the blasting crew and blasters often suffer serious injuries due to inadequacy of the shelter used for protection from blasts. 
The functional task-elements of a blast area security system are (a) estimate the flyrock zone based on shot conditions, and add a factor of safety to determine the bounds of the blast area, (b) clear all employees, contractors, and visitors from the blast area, (c) post guards at the access points to prevent 
unauthorized entry, (d) use adequate blasting shelters for employees whose presence is required in the blast area, and (e) maintain effective communication with guards, mine foreman, and other employees. 
Determination of the bounds of the blast area:
Correct assessment of the bounds of the blast area is the first step in ensuring safety.  The blaster should determine the bounds of the blast area after a careful consideration of such information as the driller’s log, blasthole deviation data, laser-profile data, slant of the holes, blasthole loading data, condition of the highwall, presence of overhangs, back-breaks, voids, weathering, and variations in the local geology.  A blaster usually understands that in a given surface or underground mine, blast area could vary from shot to shot.  There are many occurrences of flyrock landing beyond the property or permit boundary in surface blasting.  Such occurrences demonstrate incorrect determination of the bounds of the blast area.  Flyrock from a limestone quarry traveled about 930 ft and fatally injured a resident who was mowing grass on his property [MSHA 1990b].   
In underground mining situations, the mine roof conditions, ground support system, and ventilation are important factors in determining the extent of the blast area.  In an underground gold mining operation in Nevada, blasting in a drift caused a roof fall in another drift situated about 25 ft below the blasted drift.  When the blast occurred in the upper drift, about 40 to 50 tons of material above the anchorage zone, supported by 6-ft roof bolts, fell as a result of the blast. 
Blasting often causes redistribution of stress in pillars and roof area.  The blast area should be extended beyond any suspected zones of weakness in roof strata.  Often, blasting has caused roof falls in metal/nonmetal mines particularly in weak roofs.  The blast area should be extended to mitigate such hazards.  Roof and rib conditions need to be checked before any employee is allowed to enter the area.    
Determining the bounds of a blast in an underground coal mine is an especially important task.  Serious injuries and fatalities have occurred when a blast shoots through into an adjacent entry.  In an underground coal mine in Floyd County, KY, three miners were injured when a face blasted into an outby crosscut [MSHA, 2003].   
Removing employees from the blast area:
All employees must be cleared from the blast area and removed to a safe location prior to any scheduled blasting.  All equipment in the blast area should be removed or protected from flyrock damage, if possible.  An accounting must be made for all employees to make sure that no one is left behind in the blast area.  Arrangements should be made to ensure that no one can return back to the blast area prior to sounding an “all-clear” signal.  Several accidents were caused because a blaster or a crew member was within the bounds of the blast area when the shot was fired.  In a limestone mine, a blaster and a crane operator were standing on a top bench about 120 feet from the nearest blasthole.  Upon firing the shot, the crane operator was fatally injured by flyrock [MSHA, 1994].  In a nonmetal mine, a visitor sustained serious injuries and a blaster-helper was fatally injured by flyrock [MSHA, 1990c].  They were within 150 feet from the edge of the blast.   
In many underground mines, blasting is scheduled during a non-production shift when no one, except the blast crew, is present underground.  In addition to mitigating blasting hazards, this procedure aids in providing additional time for clearing dust, smoke, and fumes from the underground workings.   
For surface coal mines, 30 CFR § 77.1303 (h) requires that “All persons shall be cleared and removed from the blasting area unless suitable blasting shelters are provided to protect men endangered by concussion or flyrock from blasting.”  For underground coal mines, 30 CFR § 75.1325 (c) requires that “All persons shall leave the blasting area and each immediately adjacent working place where a hazard would be created by the blast, to an area that is around at least one corner from the blasting area. The qualified person shall ascertain that all persons are a safe distance from the blasting area.”   The onus of determining the safe distance rests on the qualified person, who in most cases is the blaster. 
In brief, the message is “Be alert and share information; know the blasting time, blast area and clearing procedure; and do not enter the blast area until an “all-clear” signal is sounded”.  
 
Access control: 
To prevent unauthorized entry, guards should be posted at all access points leading to the blast area.  Guards should physically remain at their duty stations until an “all-clear” signal is sounded.  The guards must be attentive at all times to ensure the security of the blast.  Additionally, barricades may be erected with signs in bold letters such as “Warning! Explosives in Use, Blasting Area, Do Not Enter” may be posted at all access points.   
For surface and underground metal/nonmetal mines, 30 CFR § 56.6306 (e) (3) and 57.6306(e) (3) require that “All access routes to the blast area shall be guarded or barricaded to prevent the passage of persons or vehicles.”  30 CFR § 56.6306 (a) and 57.6306(a) require that “When explosive materials or initiating systems are brought to the blast site, the blast site shall be attended; barricaded and posted with warning signs, such as “Danger,” “Explosives,” or “Keep Out;” or flagged against unauthorized entry.” 
The OSM regulations in 30 CFR § 816.66 (c) and 817.66 (c) require that “Access within the blast area shall be controlled to prevent presence of livestock or unauthorized persons during blasting and until an authorized representative of the operator has reasonably determined that – (a) No unusual hazards, such as imminent slides or undetonated charges, exist; and (b) Access to and travel within the blasting area can be safely resumed.” 
Several accidents were related to inadequate access-control to the blast area.  A neighbor was fatally injured when he inadvertently entered the blast area through an access trail before the blast [MSHA, 1999].  Guards were not posted for access control.  The access trail was in a wooded area and not visible from the firing station.  This incident underscores the need for an effective access control protocol.    
In a coal mine incident, a guard was posted to prevent entry to an access road leading to the blast area.  Immediately before the blast, the guard left his post and went to the mine office for a brief visit.  No barricade or notice of impending blasting was posted at this access road.  In the meantime, a drill operator and a dozer operator, unaware of the impending blasting, entered the pit area in a pickup truck.  Upon firing the shot, the dozer operator was fatally injured and the drill operator sustained injuries [MSHA, 1989a].  This accident could have been prevented by proper access control.  
In another coal mine, a fatal accident occurred because an employee, who was cleared from the blast area, managed to return to the coal bench a few minutes before the scheduled blast.  No one including the blaster noticed the employee returning to the coal bench.  The victim was about 15 feet from the toe of a 43-feet highwall.  Upon firing the overburden shot, the employee and his pickup truck were covered under a pile of blasted material [MSHA, 1989b].  It is important to make certain that no one can return back to the blast area until an “all-clear” signal is sounded.   
Bennett’s [1981] study indicated that access control and blast guarding suffer from poor procedures rather than from a lack of advanced technology.  Management and employees should diligently strive to formulate and follow best site-specific procedures and policies to prevent injuries.  A good access control procedure, upon implementation, can prevent injuries from blasting.  
 
Blasting shelter:
MSHA accident data indicate that blasters and helpers often suffer injuries due to lack of adequate shelter from a blast.  The blaster and blasting crew are typically closer to a blast than other employees and need to use shelter that will provide complete protection from flyrock that may be projected from a blast.  Flyrock from a blast can travel vertically and does not fall like gentle rain.  Flyrock can also travel along a horizontal path and become a deadly projectile.   
Unfortunately, there are too many instances that illustrate the use of inadequate protection from flyrock that was generated by a blast.  For example, a blaster fired a charge inside a water well hole.  A piece of flyrock traveled 208 feet and fatally struck the blaster on the head.  The blaster was standing in the open and did not use some means of protection such as a blasting shelter. 
In another incident in Pulaski County, KY, a blaster having sixteen years experience, took shelter behind a metal magazine of approximate size 4-feet high by 4-feet wide by 4-feet long and fired a charge.  A piece of flyrock weighing about 51 pounds traveled 150 feet and fatally struck the blaster on the head [Schneider, 1995].  This accident could have been prevented by using an adequate blasting shelter.   
Figure 2 shows a blasting shelter used at a surface limestone mine in Southwestern USA.  The shelter was constructed by the mine’s personnel.  Another example of a blasting shelter used at a surface limestone mine in Ohio is shown in Figure 3; the mining company requires that this type of blasting shelter be used for protection from a blast.  The blast shelter is mounted on skids for ease of transportation and is constructed of steel that is 3/8-inch thick.  The use of specially designed blasting shelters can provide the protection needed to prevent a person from being struck by flyrock.  In the international sphere, a more sophisticated blast shelter has been designed by two Queensland, Australian inventors [Queensland Government Mining Journal, May 2001].  The shelter, which is cylindrical and constructed of 5/8-inch thick steel, is mounted on a rubber tired trailer.   
Light buildings, pickup trucks, and other vehicles which are often used as covers, have been penetrated by flyrock [Schneider, 1996].  During a coal mine blast, a blaster positioned himself under a Ford 9000, 2½-ton truck, and fired the shot.  A piece of flyrock traveled about 750 ft and fatally injured the blaster under the truck [MSHA, 1992].  This accident could have been prevented by using an adequate blasting shelter.  A safe location and sufficient cover is critical to a blaster’s protection if the firing lines are not 
long enough to be beyond the flyrock range [Schneider, 1996].  Some blasting operations use a remote controlled firing system to permit blasters to stay out of the blast area. 
In a construction blast, an employee standing behind a front-end loader was struck by flyrock.  The employee suffered trauma to his neck and lacerations to his face [OSHA, 1992]. This accident could have been prevented by using an adequate blasting shelter.  
The Chief Inspector of Mines in Queensland, Australia, reported that a blaster was standing behind a steel hopper while video-taping a toe shot in a metalliferous quarry.  Flyrock traveled about 246 feet and seriously injured the blaster.  The blaster lost his right eye, his cheek bone was shattered, and his jaw was broken.  This accident could have been prevented by using a proper blasting shelter.   

Effective communication:
Effective communication is a key element in preventing blasting injuries.  Blasting in mining operations is a complex process and requires coordination and communication between (a) driller and blaster, (b) blaster and crew members, (c) blaster and other miners, and (d) blaster and mine management, among others.  Failure of effective communication may result in fatalities and serious injuries.  Workers and visitors should be informed about the blasting signals, evacuation procedure, location, and timing of a scheduled blast on a daily basis.  Many surface operations schedule blasting events between sunrise and sunset.  In many underground operations, blasting is often scheduled when no one, except the blast crew, is present in the vicinity.   
Audible signals, such as sirens, whistles, or horns mounted on a vehicle, are used in many operations to caution employees, visitors, and neighbors about a scheduled blasting event.  Enough time should be provided to facilitate orderly evacuation of all personnel, whose presence is not required, from the blast area.   
For surface and underground metal-nonmetal mines, 30 CFR § 56.6306 (f) (1) and 57.6306 (f) (1) require that “Ample warning shall be given to allow all persons to be evacuated.”  For surface coal mines, 30 CFR § 77.1303 requires that “ample warning shall be given before blasts are fired.”  The OSM regulation in 30 CFR 816.64 (a) requires that “The operator shall publish the blasting schedule in a newspaper of the general circulation in the locality of the blasting site at least 10 days, but not more than 30 days, before beginning of a blasting program.”  30CFR 817.64 (a) requires that “The operator shall notify, in writing, residents within ½ mile of the blasting site and local governments of the proposed times and locations of blasting operations.”   
Unified approach for mitigating injuries:
Brnich & Mallett [2003] advanced the concept of conducting a hazard-risk assessment for preventing mining injuries.  A site-specific hazard-risk assessment based on the probability of an event and its severity is an excellent tool for the blasting community.  Blasting releases a tremendous amount of energy within a very short time and is considered a hazardous operation.  An analysis of site-specific risk factors will help in understanding and mitigating possible hazards.  A site-specific hazard-risk matrix should be drawn up and discussed during blaster/miners job assignments, safety discussions, and training sessions.   
An Australian document [DR 04062, 2004] issued for public comment accentuates the risks of blasting and recommends that “…whenever explosives are to be used that a competent person(s) carry out a detailed risk assessment to identify all foreseeable potential hazards and take appropriate steps to eliminate or reduce the likelihood and mitigate the severity of any effects so that risks are at an acceptable level.”  The Australian document accentuates Brnich & Mellett’s [2003] hazard-risk assessment concept. 
Brulia [1993] reported that about 80-90% of all accidents are caused by human factors, and listed five salient elements which contributed to these accidents: • Negligence - failure to observe safety rules and instructions, • Hasty decisions - acting before thinking usually leading to hazardous shortcuts, • Inadequate instruction - untrained or improperly trained personal, • Overconfidence - taking chances,  • Lack of planning - insufficient understanding of a blasting situation. 
Safety professionals often use a multi-faceted approach for injury prevention. This includes intervention techniques conducted through (a) training and continuing education of miners and blasters, (b) site specific policies and procedures, and (c) engineering controls.  Commitment to safety by the blaster, blasting crew, other miners, and the mine operator is the most essential ingredient for injury prevention.   
 
Training and continuing education:
Training and continuing education play a vital role in building up and enhancing the knowledge base of employees.  It helps the blaster, blasting crew, and other miners to develop a higher level of awareness to identify hazards and apply proper mitigating techniques.  Site-specific training relative to the bounds of the blast area, non-work zone beyond the blast area, blast guarding, access control, and clearing protocol should be made available to all new employees.  A detailed discussion of hazards associated with the transport and use of explosives should also be included in the overall training program.  Drillers should be trained to search for any geological anomaly and report such information to the blaster.  Blasters should be trained to consider all available data to determine the bounds of the blast area for each shot.  The level of training, experience, and attitude of explosive handlers is crucial to the attainment of higher blasting safety [Brulia, 1993]. 
The ISEE has made available several state-of-the-art training modules for mining and construction blasting.  The MSHA’s National Mine Health and Safety Academy also provides training session and material for surface and underground blasting.  Regular refresher training should be made available to all explosive handlers.  OSM and many state regulations require that blasters working in surface coal mines be examined and certified.   
It is important to conduct a post-blast analysis of each shot to determine if the shot performed as planned.  And, if there are any deviations, the blaster should look for the reasons for such deviations.  All near miss incidents should be critically examined.  Training should be aimed at greatly augmenting the blaster’s knowledge and confidence level.  The blaster should be proactive and understand that “The challenge is defined, the solution is clear, the need is immediate, and success depends on the blaster.” 
Site specific policies and procedures: 
Mine operators should develop site-specific safety procedures consistent with company policy, local, state and federal laws.  The procedure should address all activities such as equipment selection, blast planning, determining the location of blastholes, pre-blast examination of face and high wall, evaluation of driller’s log, loading and priming of explosive charge, determining the bounds of the blast area and non-work zone beyond the blast area, evacuation and clearing protocol of employees, personnel accounting system, examination and guarding blast area, blasting time and signal, access control to blast area, and communication protocol.   
Many mine operators have standardized their blast guarding protocol.  Pre-blast planning and discussion with crew members reinforce confidence and provide an avenue for good cooperation.  Such discussion and planning forums also provide an opportunity to ask questions and resolve any doubts or misconceptions. 
As a matter of policy, many underground mines schedule a blasting event for the evening or night shift when no one, except the blasting crew, is present underground.  Some operators have installed a remote firing system to remove the blaster from the blast area.   
 
Engineering controls: 
Blasting safety can be greatly enhanced by good engineering controls and feedback mechanisms.  Engineering controls should be well understood and closely followed by the blasting community.  Dick et al. [1983] and Fletcher & D’Andrea [1986] advocated the use of portable blasting shelters.  The shelter may be cylindrical in shape and constructed of heavy steel to withstand any possible impact from flyrock. The portable shelter may be mounted on wheels or skids for ease of moving from one blast area to another.  The blaster enters the shelter and closes the door prior to firing the shot. 
Commitment to safe blasting practices by the mine operator, blaster-in-charge, blasting and drilling crew and other miners and affected persons is an essential ingredient in injury prevention.  Many mines have developed excellent site-specific blast guarding systems.  An individual, with experience and knowledge in blasting, should oversee the entire process and advise the blasting personnel accordingly.  This individual may be a blasting superintendent, blasting foreman, blasting engineer, or blaster-in-charge.  This person should make sure that all relevant policies and procedures are followed, and in case of any discrepancy that corrective action is appropriately taken.   
 
Summary: 
One thousand one hundred and thirty-one blasting-related injuries were reported by the mining industry during the period 1978-2003.  Blast area security accounted for 50% of these injuries followed by premature blast, flyrock, misfires, and fumes. 
One of the greatest challenges, a blaster faces, is to accurately determine the bounds of the blast area.  This is particularly true in geologically disturbed rock that is to be blasted.  The determination of the bounds of the blast area is the first step in ensuring safety.  The functional task-elements of a blast area security system are (a) estimate the flyrock zone based on shot conditions, (b) clear all employees, 
contractors, and visitors from the blast area, (c) post guards at the access points to prevent unauthorized entry, (d) use adequate blasting shelters for those persons whose presence is required in the blast area, and (e) maintain an effective communication with guards, mine foreman, and other employees and affected persons.    
Blast area security in underground mines is much more complex than surface blasting.  Blasting may cause ground fall in adjacent entries, and exposure to smoke, dust, or toxic fumes in the adjacent or other affected airways.  All employees must be removed from the affected airways.  In some underground metal-nonmetal mines, blasting is scheduled during a non-production shift when no one, except the blast crew, is present underground. 
Bennett’s study indicated that access control and blast guarding suffer from poor procedures rather than from a lack of advanced technology.  Management and employees should diligently strive to formulate and follow best site-specific procedures and policies to prevent injuries.   
Brnich & Mallett advanced the concept of conducting a hazard-risk assessment for preventing mining injuries.  A site-specific hazard-risk analysis based on the probability of an event and its severity is an excellent tool for use by the blasting community.  An analysis of site-specific risk factors will help in understanding and mitigating possible hazards.  A site-specific hazard-risk matrix should be prepared and discussed during blaster/miners job assignments, safety discussions, and training sessions.   
Effective communication is a key element in preventing blasting injuries.  Blasting is a complex operation and requires coordination and communication between (a) driller and blaster, (b) blaster and crew members, (c) blaster and other miners, and (d) blaster and mine management, among others.  Workers and visitors should be informed about the blasting signal, evacuation procedure, location, and timing of a scheduled blast on a daily basis. 
Safety should continue to be of paramount importance in all blasting operations.  The goal is to send every miner home safe and healthy after each shift.   