
Climate Safety:

Safe and Healthy Summer:

If we consider the statistics for the past 30 years of weather related fatalities all over the world, fatalities due the HEAT is the highest, followed by hurricane and flood.
Summer temperatures especially here in the Middle East can reach as high as 50 degrees Celsius (122 degrees Fahrenheit), making heat related illness (such as heat exhaustion, heat stress and heat stroke a very serious concern. Heat stroke can be fatal in many cases because it happens so quickly - there is not much time to react. And not only that, to determine the actual heat that a person feels, you need also to consider. The relative humidity - not just the temperature reading.
These are the reasons why Dubai Municipality have taken its own initiatives to increase awareness and educated the employers and the workers about the serious consequences of heat related illnesses thus the “Safe and Healthy Summer Campaign” was born.
The campaign material contains all the basic information about heat related illnesses - from Employer or Management interventions, workers responsibilities as well as precautionary measures to stay safe and healthy especially during summer.

Signs & Symptoms of Heat Related Illness:

​https://static.wixstatic.com/media/8fafd4_c28a3d91366249e9ac5929147357f6bc~mv2_d_1200_1200_s_2.jpg/v1/fill/w_1200,h_1200,al_c,q_85,enc_auto/a56dd04dd9b38ddebe47e061a7fcfe2f.jpg
 
What Employers Need to do: 
Employers should take the following precautions to protect workers from heat stress:

1, Employers must conduct heat stress assessment, develop and implement heat stress management program where a worker is or may be exposed to conditions that could trigger heat related disorders.

2, Employers must provide adequate training to all workers at risk and it must contain at least the following:
How heat stress and heat stroke develop
How to prevent heat stress
Importance of monitoring yourself and co-workers for symptoms
Personal factors (e.g. weight, medical conditions, etc.)
What to do if he or his co-worker develops heat illness at work

Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)

3, Employers must implement engineering if not administrative control measures such as
Schedule work to minimize heat exposure (i.e. early morning or late afternoon for  outside work)
Establish work and rest cycles or practice job rotation

Acclimatize workers by exposing them for progressively longer periods to hot work environments Employers
4, Provide constant supply of cool drinking water & electrolyte replacement drink (hydration liquids).
5, Ensure arrangement of welfare facilities e.g. shaded or well ventilated area for resting, access to wash rooms, etc.
6, Ensure proper arrangement for first aid or medical assistance in case of emergency.
7, Provide adequate supervision to all concerned workers. Do not allow workers to work alone where heat stress is possible. 

What Employees need to know:

Workers should take precautions to avoid Heat Stress:
1, Be physically ﬁt - Acclimatize yourself gradually to heat exposure.
2, Stay Hydrated - Drink cool water frequently (e.g. 1 cup every 20 minutes) and electrolyte replacement drink (1 cup 2-3 times a day)
3, Avoid oily foods, heavy meals and drinks that contain alcohol or drinks with much caffeine or sugar. Instead, consume more fruits & vegetables.
4, Don't overexert or push yourself; if you’re getting tired, slow down or work at a steady pace.
5, Take regular breaks in cool or shaded areas.
6, Monitor your physical condition and that of your workers.
7, Report any symptoms or cases of heat rash or stress to your superior or if you feel unwell on the job.

Signs & Symptoms of Heat Stress:

High temperature combined with humidity leads to excessive sweating in an attempt to cool the body. This can lead to rapid dehydration (excessive loss of body water & important electrolytes). This causes various heat related illnesses and can lead to heat exhaustion and heat stroke if uncontrolled.
 

                                            Huge sweat loss = Water + Electrolytes loss

                            Symptoms of Dehydration in employees due to huge sweat loss.

https://static.wixstatic.com/media/8fafd4_c56f98e859cc420ebc92809410634f05~mv2_d_1651_1275_s_2.jpg/v1/fill/w_1200,h_920,al_c,q_85,usm_0.66_1.00_0.01,enc_auto/heat-stress-poster.jpg

Safety Problem (HSE Related):

Human error on decision making and risk perception are primary causes or contributors to serious accidents. Dehydration is one of the important factors that affects the sense of body position leading to accidents. Even mild dehydration leads to deterioration in short-term memory, simple visual orientation, simple arithmetic, and complex motor coordination. 

Factors Affecting Heat Stress Risks:
1, Environmental Factors - Environmental factors such as ambient air temperature, air movement, and relative humidity can all affect an individual’s response to heat.
2, Job Factors - Job factors may include the workload and the type of work of an individual as well as the specific area or location of his work.
Workload - the body generates more heat during heavy physical work such as construction workers working in hot weather will generate a tremendous amount of heat and are at risk of developing heat stress without proper precautions.
Type of work – developing heat stress depends also on the type of work being performed and which specific area.  
Clothing & Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) - heat stress can be caused or aggravated by wearing PPE such as fire or chemical retardant clothing. Non breathable garments block the evaporation of sweat and can lead to substantial heat stress. The more clothing worn or the heavier the clothing, the longer it takes evaporation to cool the skin. Remember too that darker-colored clothing absorbs more radiant heat than lighter-colored clothing.
3, Personal Risk Factors - It is difficult to predict just who will be affected by heat stress and when, because individual susceptibility varies. There are, however, certain physical conditions that can reduce the body’s natural ability to withstand high temperatures such as:
1, Weight, age, etc.
2, Poor physical condition/ not physically fit
3, Previous or recent illness & medical condition
4, Heart disease/high blood pressure & medication
5, Lifestyle (alcohol consumption, lack of rest eating, etc)
6, Lack of acclimatization

Good Practices to prevent Heat Stress:

Hydration - Maintain hydration by drinking water and use of Electrolyte replacement drink for quick Hydration.
Personal Hygiene - take showers before and after duty. Healthy Eating – avoid oily/fatty foods, sodas - eat fruits & vegetables instead Enough Rest – get enough rest and avoid alcohol,
Caffeine Acclimatize – let your body gradually adjust to the heat
Urine check/chart – check your urine color for signs of dehydration
Clothing – Wear comfortable/loose, lightweight, light-colored clothing such as cotton.
Personal Protective Equipments – use hats, coveralls, sunscreens
Schedule work to minimize heat exposure - Do the hardest physical work during the coolest part of the day (early morning or late afternoon) Take rest breaks in a cool, shaded or well ventilated area. Take more breaks during the hottest part of the day or when doing hard physical work. Allow your body to cool down before you resume working again.
Learn to recognize the signs and symptoms of heat stress in yourself and of your co-workers. Avoid working alone.
Always report to your superior if you feel unwell in the course of your duty.  
Take rest breaks in a cool, shaded or well ventilated area. Take more breaks during the hottest part of the day or when doing hard physical work. Allow your body to cool down before you resume working again.
Learn to recognize the signs and symptoms of heat stress in yourself and of your co-workers. Avoid working alone.
Always report to your superior if you feel unwell in the course of your duty.  
 