Maintenance Work:

​

Maintenance work is considered generally by most people, especially in the private property sector, as a low skill job that can be handled by handymen, odd job workers or even unskilled labourers.  The injury toll in the maintenance sector, very often involving fatal cases, was high and most difficult to tackle.  It was not until recently that people in the industry started to manage the problems more seriously.  Another problem is that the duty holders are often SMEs and self-employed. 

​

Typical risks and characteristics identified in most maintenance work are:

​

interference with other activities (e.g. presence of the public and occupants of the building);

presence of services (e.g. water pipes and electrical cables in the floors and walls); and

high areas, often on the external walls, posing risk of falling from heights.

 
The challenge of any safety professional responsible for such works is as follows:

​

to ensure the compliance of the safety plan and the implementation of appropriate safety measures;

to coordinate the work amongst different parties concerned;

to suspend the works or remove any SME or a self-employed worker for any serious breach or non-compliance of safety rules;

suspend any contract in the event of a serious breach of the law; and

to suspend the works in case of imminent serious danger. 

 
Nevertheless, there are some critical success factors in planning and executing maintenance work.  These are –

​

Recognizing the importance of safety at the design phase;

Having collaborative management, involving all relevant persons;

Putting in place a sound risk assessment and prevention process;

Ensuring effective implementation of all prevention systems;

Motivation of all the workers and all parties involved in the project;

Ensuring effective information, training and communication; and

Monitoring performance.   

​

Lifts and escalators:

 

Safety precautions to be observed: 
 

Provide training in safety precautions associated with lift maintenance and repairs.

Unskilled workers and/or inexperienced apprentice should be accompanied by a competent worker or lead hand.

Permit to work or tag out system should be in place and observed.

Warning notices should be posted.

Turn off the system supply and work on emergency lighting or separate work light inside the lift car or lift shaft while repair is in progress.

Risk assessment should be conducted.

Detailed method statements and work procedures should be prepared and conveyed to the workers.

Communication equipment such as walkie-talkie should be provided and used by workers.

Trapping zone including machines and lift car should be securely fenced. 


Contractors’ responsibility 
 

To plan and carry out an assessment before work starts;  

To appoint suitable supervisors and engineers in writing to take charge;

To employ competent persons to carry out the works;  

To provide information and training to the workers;

To employ trained first aider with necessary gears and supplies;

To ensure effective communication.  

​

Engineers’/supervisors’ responsibility:
 
To receive safety training relating to the hazards associated with the installation, thorough examination, inspection, testing, services, maintenance, repair and dismantling of lifts and escalators and knowledge of safe working practices to be adopted to avoid associated hazards. 

​

Site safety assessment:
 
To develop a reliable safe system of work for lift/escalator works, an initial site safety assessment should be made on the work site by a person who is competent to do so before the commencement of every lift/escalator project. Such a person should preferably be a safety professional or an experienced engineer/supervisor, with adequate knowledge of safety and health at lift and escalator works.  After making the assessment, safety and health issues should be identified and recorded.  

 

These include –  
 
Access and egress:- 
 

Safe access to/egress from, e.g. the machine room and the lift shaft,

Rescue procedures and evacuation arrangements in case of emergencies

Details of lift/escalator, control system, the type of work, etc. to be carried out  

Instruction not to allow the workers to work on live electrical equipment. If it is unavoidable, special safety precautions should be in place.

All dangerous parts of the machinery to be effectively guarded

Arrangements for the use of communication equipment by the working personnel during the work to be made.  

Specify the key words/signals to be used during the communication.

Safe manual handling procedures to be followed.

 
Safety guidelines on lift and escalator works: 
 

Safe and easy ways and access routes with sufficient headroom to the machinery spaces should be provided.  

The enclosure and supporting structure should be sound and free from defects.

The handrail, steps, combs and drive for steps should be functioning properly.

The braking system and the manual control and emergency stop switches should also be functioning properly.

The protections against risks of overspeeding and unintentional reversal of the direction of travel should be checked for their effectiveness.

​

Safety features in the method statement after the safety assessment:

 

The way in which work would be performed, and

The number/trade of working personnel involved in carrying out the work (including those from the subcontractors) should be stated clearly.

The anticipated equipment required to be used including the use of lifting appliances and lifting gear for mechanical handling’.  

The availability and location of secure fencing, portable access ladders, personal protective equipment such as safety boots, safety helmets, safety goggles, safety gloves, safety harnesses/ belts, secure anchorage, fittings for the safety harnesses/belts, independent lifelines and etc. should be ascertained and provided.

The time and duration available for the work to be performed should be identified and recorded.

The number of parties, and the respective timing, working on the same lift/escalator installation should be ascertained.

Emergency procedures and facilities, including first aid, should always be made available for dealing with emergencies on site. Such facilities should be regularly maintained and updated properly. 

 

The nature of the task:
 

The likelihood of changes in the working personnel, and

The equipment and location of the work.

​

Working on lifts: 
 

Follow safety practices recommended by the lift manufacturers.

Provide adequate lighting.

Provide portable battery operated lights for workers working inside the lift well.

The lift should be made inoperative and locked out before any work begins

Provide safe means of access and egress.

Provide guard for the dangerous part of any machinery.

 
Working on car top: 
 

The working personnel should be able to hold firmly on the crosshead or other rigid parts of the car structure when the car is moving. Holding any wire rope by a worker may result in serious injury and should therefore be prohibited.

If there is an adjacent lift in the same lift well, the worker should avoid contacting with any counterweights and keep within the limits of his lift especially when the car is moving.

As a general rule, the car top should be accessed from the top terminal landing. 

 

Working below a lift car: 
 

Before entering a lift pit, the stopping devices of the lift should be tested for their effectiveness.  

If there is no direct access door to the lift pit, suitable safe means with hand holds of access to the pit should be provided from the lowest landing entrance.  

When working below a car with restrictive space which can accommodate only one person, appropriate restraint device for the lift car should be properly installed prior to gaining access into the pit.

Worker should activate the pit-stop switch to prevent any movement of the car before entering the lift pit.

No worker should enter or work in a lift pit with standing water.

The shoes of workers should be free from any oil or grease to prevent slipping. Should watch out for potential tripping hazards such as oil lines or sump holes.

Warning signs/notices should be displayed at prominent positions. 

 

Working at lift landings: 
 

When workers are engaged in maintaining and examining lifts, the landing door may from time to time be required to remain open even at where the car is not there, e.g. to gain access into the lift pit or to the car top.

Appropriate dedicated devices instead of normal hand tools should be used to keep the lift doors in an open position.  

To protect the workers at work, a fencing/barrier between 900 mm and 1150 mm in height with preferably a mid-rail and toe-board of not less than 200 mm in height should be erected in front of the entrance at the lift landing.  

The fencing/barrier should bear the relevant safety signs and warning notices in both Chinese and English to warn against the danger of removal of fencing/barrier.

To facilitate the workers to work on the correct equipment safely, multiple lift installations should be individually identified on the lowest and highest landing entrances as well as the associated equipment in machine rooms and pulley rooms.

When the car is not at its normal position at a landing, unlocking or opening of a landing door should only be done if it is absolutely necessary for carrying out work by the working personnel.  

Special unlocking device should be used to unlock or open a landing door and be kept in a safe place. A check should be made to ensure that the door is closed and relocked each time after use.

Without the provision of fencings/barriers and warning signs, a landing door/gate should always be kept closed except during the short period of entering/leaving the lift well at the landing by the workers or the transportation of materials for work via the landing.         

​

Working at height:

​

Where work cannot be safely carried out on the ground, from any part of a building or other permanent structure, suitable scaffolds with proper working platform(s) should be provided for working personnel [Regulation 38B of the CS(S)R]. The Code of Practice for Scaffolding issued by the Commissioner for Labour provides practical guidance on the construction and maintenance of bamboo or metal scaffolds.

​

In particular, the following should be adopted on the safe erection, use and dismantling of metal scaffolds:-

 

A method statement should be prepared by a professional engineer before commencing metal scaffolding erection. The method statement should include the following:-  layout, support details and construction details of the metal scaffold (so that all concerned know what is to be erected and what is to be controlled);  justifications on the strength and stability of the scaffolding components during erection, use and dismantling;  sequence of erection and dismantling; and  standards of materials and workmanship.

The professional engineer as mentioned in (a) above should have adequate training and practical experience to make decisions on whether the loads on the scaffold or on the supports can be resisted safely without undue movements.

The method statement for metal scaffolds supported by fastenings (or anchors) to concrete or masonry should be checked by a qualified engineer in the structural discipline or equivalent. 

​

Safety nets: 
 
The use of safety nets would be a better alternative than the use of safety harnesses in certain instances. Some of the examples are as follows:-

 

Hazards and the use of safety harness are deemed impractical or not feasible where many workers are working in one location, or

Where large open areas or long loading edges expose workers to height under a work method, the work of erecting and dismantling of safety nets should be carefully planned and supervised, to be undertaken only by competent working personnel. 

Safety nets should not be stretched taut when erected, but should have an initial sag of between a quarter to a fifth of the length of the shortest side of the net.  Safety net will deflect when arresting a falling body and requires a minimum clearance below.  

Safety nets should be fitted as close to the working surface as possible, and in no case further below than the maximum distance marked on the label attached to the net which would be either 1m or 6m. The gap between a net and the building should be as close as practicable but in no case should this be more than 200 mm.

Safety nets should not be stretched taut when erected, but should have an initial sag of between a quarter to a fifth of the length of the shortest side of the net.

A safety net will deflect when arresting a falling body and requires a minimum clearance below.

The clearance should be equal to two-thirds of the length of the shortest side or 2 m minimum in order to prevent the contact with any surfaces or structures below. Members supporting the safety net should be adequate in both the horizontal and vertical directions at the net perimeter to resist the fall. A safety net must be inspected at regular intervals and after any fall. Test cords included in the net should be regularly tested in accordance with the recommendations made by reputable national or international standards.

The use of safety harnesses is preferred to safety belts. The anchorage points should be as high as possible above the working position in order to limit the height of any fall. In some work activities, inertia reel may also be used. Safety harnesses/belts should be worn and fitted correctly. They should be regularly inspected and maintained in good serviceable condition in accordance with the manufacturers’ instructions. In using safety harness or belt, appropriate anchorage and suitable standards of safety harness/belt of national or international standards should be adopted.

​

Maintenance of chiller room and water tank: 
 
Cooling towers spray water through the air.  As the process is highly oxygenated, it can become corrosive to metal piping and system components. Corrosion products from this process can foul and clog the system to the point where it will cease to function properly. Cooling towers can also become breeding grounds for fouling growth of algae and bacterial slimes that can interfere with equipment efficiency and operation.  They can even become the sources of organisms that can threaten human health and life. 
 
The maintenance of chiller room, water tank and ancillary equipment is one of the most common items on the daily agenda for facility managers and property owners.  Most if not all of the duty holders discharge their duties or leave this important task to the specialist contractors, general electrical, water and air-conditioning repairers etc.  
 
A number of these jobs are frequently left with subcontractors, small companies, inexperienced apprentices unaccompanied by competent personnel or even individuals without any formal training, qualifications and trade experience.  
 
Workers engaged in maintenance are often faced with the hazards and issues arising from the following:  

 

Working at height

Electrical installations

Confined space

Handling of contaminants and wastes

Handling of chemicals and biocides 

 
To improve the situation, the following areas should be looked into:

 

Lock out system  

Personal protective equipment

Good housekeeping

Risk assessment

Safe system of work

 
For some systems still using asbestos containing materials, such as lagging, insulation coating and painting, gaskets, fuse holders, etc., proper asbestos removal procedures must be strictly adhered to. 

​

Cooling towers: 
 
Biological growth, scaling, and corrosion are the main maintenance concerns with cooling towers. Typical treatment involves the application of chemicals such as chlorine, sulfuric acid, phosphorous, and zinc compounds. Care must be taken in the storage, use, or discharge of these chemicals.  Also it is necessary to ensure that the proper mixes and proportions of chemicals are used, and to determine the corresponding blowdown rates. Excessive application can increase the possibility of corrosion and other undesirable impacts. Ozone is beginning to gain acceptance in the industry as a viable biocide alternative.  
 
Cooling tower water is continuously exposed to airborne organic materials, and the buildup of bacteria, algae, fungi, and viruses presents hazards to the tower system and to the health of workers engaged in regular maintenance work.  
 
Guideline on health issues:

​

Water cooled towers should be periodically maintained.

Select suitable disinfectant and biocide for removal of dirt and organic growth, e.g. algae and slime. Appropriate tests should be conducted to make certain that the active detergent/disinfectant being employed is present in proper amounts at the end of 24 hours.

Any “slug” of dose recommended by the manufacturer for disinfectant or biocide used to control growth should be performed during the operation of the system. This would be in addition to, and compatible with, the normal water treatment programme.

For good engineering practice, fan-coil units and air handlers should be equipped with an approved biocide feeder to inhibit bacterial growth, prevent clogging of the condensate drain system and prevent odors.

 
Operation and regular routine maintenance:
 
For the correct operation and regular routine maintenance of cooling towers, air-handling systems and hot, warm and cold water systems, etc. the minimum requirements are as follows –  
 
Water systems should be disinfected, drained, cleaned and then disinfected again when the installation:

​

is being started up for the first time;  

has been out of use and has not been dry; or  

has been extensively modified or disturbed. 

Cleaning may also be necessary at regular intervals if the system, the premises or the results of monitoring indicate that it is necessary to do so. In such cases, it is important to ensure that all parts of the system are disinfected, not just those which are readily accessible.   

 

Some cleaning methods may create large amounts of spray (i.e. high pressure water jetting). If this cannot be avoided, and particularly if cleaning is done in confined spaces, then the personnel should wear air-line or self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) unless it is not safe or practicable to do so. This is recommended as filter respiratory protective equipment has not been specifically tested for use against aerosols containing bacteria that may put the workers’ safety and health at risk.  
 
Other ways to reduce the risk to maintenance personnel include decontamination and routine cleaning of cooling towers by chlorination of the tower water prior to any physical cleaning being undertaken.  
 
Proper systems are necessary to minimize the risk of scalding and to reduce the health risk associated with the storage of warm water. These may include heat exchange systems, ultraviolet light systems, anti-scald safety valves and self-draining valves.  
 
Cooling water systems should be provided with automatically regulated water treatment systems for effective management of corrosion, scaling, fouling and microbial growth.  
 
The effectiveness of the water management system (including water treatment) should be assessed at least monthly.  
 
The employer’s responsibilities are not absolved by contracting out the maintenance, cleaning and testing. Employers should monitor the contractor’s performance.  
 
General operation and maintenance procedures: 
 
To reduce contamination of cooling towers, air-handling systems and hot, warm and cold water services, attention must be paid to their design, operation and maintenance procedures.  In particular, always refer to the recommendations supplied by the manufacturers on the safe operation and procedures for preventive maintenance. The aim is to minimize the growth of microorganisms in artificial environments and, if possible, to reduce the likelihood of inhaling any potentially contaminated aerosols. 

​

For major replacement of systems, attention should be given to:  

 

design of enclosures;  

location of building air inlets, including windows which can be opened;  

direction of prevailing winds and any localized wind patterns;  

height and design of adjacent structures;  

proximity of other discharges such as kitchen exhausts; and  

future planned developments.

 

 

Design features should facilitate cleaning, control bacterial growth and minimize drift carryover. Attention should be paid to:  

 

provision for shutdown for maintenance;  

convenient and safe accessible openings for maintenance;  

components which minimize corrosion and can be easily removed;  

minimal internal components such as structural brackets which can collect sediments;  

materials compatible with the use of disinfectant and hosing with water jets;  

sumps that can be readily drained away;  

efficient drift eliminators;  

surfaces which can be readily cleaned;  

protection of wetted surfaces from direct sunlight; and  

adequate standby facilities where continuous operation is necessary.

 

The commissioning, operating, maintaining, cleaning, decontamination and other procedures should be designed to minimize the risk to personnel working on or in the vicinity of cooling towers and other potential sources of bacteria. The installations should be examined under normal working conditions for signs of microbial growth, algae, water leaks, splashing and blockages or restrictions at air inlets. 
 
If aerosol sprays are created, the installation should be switched off when inspecting or carrying out maintenance. If this is not practicable, then particular filters, or equivalent respiratory protection should be worn to minimize the risk of inhaling water droplets contaminated by bacteria. 
 
Maintenance of manuals and records: 
 
The operating and maintenance specifications and manuals provided by the manufacturer, designer, supplier or importer should be kept and made available for use. Maintenance records should also be kept and made available for inspection.

 

The operating and maintenance records should include:  

 

physical details, including drawings, of the equipment and systems;  

manufacturers’ recommendations on maintenance, including water treatment maintenance and management;  

recommended cleaning methods and dismantling instructions;  

operating and shut-down procedures;  

date, item of equipment or system and nature of service performed; and

the name of the person or company performing the service.  

 
Safety training: 
 
Workers carrying out maintenance and water treatment should undergo in-house training to achieve an appropriate level of knowledge.  

 

The training should include:

​

operations of cooling systems;

principles of water treatment;

maintenance of records;

safety precautions; and

relevant legislations. 

 
All workers carrying out maintenance of cooling towers should be informed of the health risk associated, and instructed on the proper use of personal protective equipment. The minimum equipment needed to protect the worker from exposure to potential hazards should be provided according to the type of job being performed. 
 
 
Asbestos: 
 
Asbestos containing materials were commonly found in construction materials. In recent years, the situation has greatly improved.  One of the major reasons is that more and more old buildings have been demolished.  Today, workers have less chance of being harmed by this hazard in the maintenance of these structures due to tighter regulatory control and workers’ better awareness, proper training, adequate information and effective publicity. 
 
Workers engaged in maintenance works are particularly vulnerable to the hazards associated with the materials being handled.  In the past, Hong Kong had used asbestos extensively in –  

 

heat insulation building materials, such as:  1, roof tiles, balcony grilles, corrugated cement sheets (commonly used for roofing).  2, chimneys and flues  3, floor tiles, insulation treatment, paints, used in waterproof building materials.

boilers and steam pipes, used in power plants, gas generation plants, kitchens, hospitals, hotels, sauna, etc.

building materials for acoustic purposes, used in cinemas, entertainment halls, concert halls, school halls, acoustic ceiling and floor coverings

heavy plants and vehicles used in construction projects, such as clutch/brake linings, waterproof treatment, heat insulation parts, etc.

asbestos containing materials also found in insulation, dielectric parts, heat insulation components found in electrical equipment, e.g. fuse cartridge coverings, etc. 