
Contractor Safety Management:

​

Steps to be taken to ensure proper contractor safety management are as follows,

1. Before Contractors Start Work        
2. Induction Training         
3. Safety Cardinal Rules      
4. Management of Change
5. Emergency Drills        
6. Material Safety Data Sheet 
7. Contractor Accommodation 
8. A Guide to Toolbox Talks  
9. General Awareness         
10. Specification         
11. Scaffolding           
12. PPE Standards       
13. List of Important Standards.

​

1, Before Contractors Start Work 
 
Before a contractor can begins any work on any work, they must ensure that certain  requirements are met to minimize  risks. The contractor must: 
 

Be provided with a scope of works for the type of work or task required of the contractor on the site  . For all  other contractors the scope of works shall be a formal scope of work. Licenses, Certificates of Competency,  Training, Insurance requirements etc should be based on the scope of works.

Supply evidence of current insurances  

Complete the Contractor Statement before awarding any work.

Complete induction training as per the task being performed, once the risks have been identified and controls  established i.e. lockout, hot works etc; and

Follow of instructions given by the company management time to time without violations. 

​

2, Induction Training 
 
The Principal Contractor, their nominated employees, sub-contractors and their employees will be required to attend Induction Training to ensure they are familiar with safety requirements and emergency procedures. The training must be completed prior to the commencement of work on a site premises. 
 
Communication and Consultation 
 
All contractors are to maintain effective communication with client in relation to any safety, health or environmental  issues. Contractors who do not take part in the safety improvement meeting held by the company shall provide an outline of their procedure to ensure their employees working on client sites are informed of important and relevant workplace health and safety information.

 

3, Safety Cardinal Rules 
 
    1. Safety Provisions: Do not override or interfere with any Safety Provision nor let anyone else override or  interfere regardless  of                    seniority. 
    2. Protective Equipments: Personal Protective Equipments (PPEs) applicable to the  given task must be adhered  to. 
    3. Lock Out Procedures: Always follow isolation and lock out procedure.  
    4. No Alcohol or drugs: No person will be allowed to work if under the influence of alcohol or drugs 
    5. Reporting Culture: Report all injuries and illness.  

​

4, Management of Change 
 
If there is a change in site supervisor and contractor management personnel, it shall be notified to designated contractor manager as a part of Management of Change (MOC) process. This also includes reassess hazards and risk where the changes occur to the work scope, plant and equipment and the working environments. 

​

5, Emergency Drills (Mock Drills) 
 
Contractor shall participate in emergency response drills to test the effectiveness of its emergency procedures and equipments and the knowledge and proficiency of Contractor’s Personnel. Contractor will provide with their emergency response plan (ERP) which must be adaptable to suit the site. 

​

6, Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) 
 
The contractor shall maintain, at the job site, Material Safety Data Sheets for all hazardous materials and products taken onto the job site. Products are stored in appropriate containers clearly labelled Prior to sending to site, all hazard substances are risk assessed to determine their safety requirements and suitability for use. 

​

7, Contractor Accommodation 
 
Where the Contractor’s Personnel provides accommodation for contract workers, the accommodation shall be appropriate for its location and be clean, safe and, at a minimum, meet the basic needs of workers. In particular, the provision of accommodation shall meet national legislation and shall have the following as minimum:

Provision of sanitary, laundry and cooking facilities and potable water

Safe location wrt health, hygiene and fire risks.  

Provision of first aid, medical facilities and proper ventilation.

Building material shall be suitably inflammable, have smoke and fire alarms fitted and include other safety checks to prevent fire.      

​

8, A Guide to Toolbox Talks 
 
Introduction:

Toolbox talks are safety discussions aimed at the Operation, Maintenance & Construction trades. The discussions are intended to educate workers about creating and maintaining safer work conditions. In addition to the construction industry, metal mining companies and heavy manufacturers also hold toolbox talks. 
 There are several facets to successful and useful toolbox talks. As a general rule, the talks are short and they are kept interesting and relevant. The goal is to empower employees so that they can recognize, avoid, report, and correct HSE hazards. 
 
Conducting a Toolbox Talk

Toolbox Talks may be conducted as a minimum of ones a week or at the beginning of a high risk operation/task.  

Choose a topic that is relevant to your audience; one that will create  a discussion; a two-way communication; use 

Either your own topic, or one generated from the Toolbox talk program.  

It does not have to be an office; a canteen or workshop area or a work distribution area will suffice.  

The ideal audience would be between 4 and 10 members but larger audiences, on site sometimes may be  the only solution.  

Duration should be limited from 10 to 15 minutes, do not get side-tracked on other peripheral issues.  

Use a questioning approach, get the message across and listen to responses.  

Toolbox talks are not lectures and are designed to get people to think and talk about HSE issues.  

Typical prompts / questions may be:                                                                                                                                                                          1, What do you as a group think the benefits are from this type of discussion?                                                                                                      2, What are the hazards from the incident described and what are the learning points. 

Try to generate interest in the topic with the questions you ask - Highlight some key words to remind you of the points to bring up.  

Avoid just reading the topic - take the topic and try to build up the discussion point by point. 

Try to be a good listener.  

Obtain signatures from participants to confirm attendance and keep record of points discussed & agreed. 

​

9, General Awareness

 
  Permit to work system:  
 
A Permit-to-Work system is an extension of a safe system of work or method statement and requires written permission before a particular job can commence. A written Permit-to-Work system is essentially a document which identifies the plant to be worked on or area to be worked in and details the precautions to be taken before work can commence. It highlights the safe procedure and is a clear record of the hazards that have been anticipated and the precautions to be taken to avoid them. 
 
An essential part of a Permit-to -Work system is the formal recording by those in charge that the precautions have been taken and it is safe for the work to proceed. Frequent checks should be made to ensure that the required safety measures are being closely adhered to. The work permit shall be displayed at the site of the work at all times. 
 
  Permits-to-Work in use at our sites are as follows: 

Working at Height  

Confined spaces  

Hot work  

Excavation  

Isolation & Lockout

Radiation  

 
  Machine guarding  
 
Site plant and equipment comes in many forms. It can be static or mobile, and can range from dumper trucks to 
welding sets. Whilst all such plant is beneficial for work if used correctly, it can pose a hazard if used incorrectly, and 
misuse can result in serious injuries. 
 

Guards are installed to protect operators and others in the area from injury. Yet some operators continually find ways of putting themselves in danger by removing machine guards or tampering with interlocks so they can operate the machines faster.  

Often it is necessary to remove a guard to service or adjust a machine, a tool or a piece of equipment. When doing this, be sure the power is turned off and the switch is locked out or tagged out.  

When the service job is completed, make sure the guard is replaced securely and is working properly.  

Breakdowns, jammed work and broken parts sometimes cause us to forget ordinary safety procedures.  

Very often, to remedy these conditions it is necessary to get into out-of-the-way places.  

Extreme caution is needed, because in some cases the location of the trouble cannot be guarded.  

So be sure that basic and added precautions are taken to avoid any movement of the parts.  

 
  To prevent accidents, be careful around: 
 

Meshing gears  

In-running rollers  

Reciprocating parts  

Chain and sprocket drives  

Cams and rollers  

Belts and pulleys  

Flywheels  

Cutting or abrasive surfaces  

Cooling fans  

Conveyor equipment  

Rotating couplings and shafts  

Hot or overheated parts  

Worm gears  

 
If you see piece of equipment without a guard, or any other unsafe condition, report it to your supervisor immediately, whether the equipment is in your work area or not. 

​

  Hand tools  
 
Misuse and poor maintenance of hand tools result in countless injuries every year. Whilst many  may be considered “minor” – all are avoidable by complying with relatively simple procedures. 
 

​Only ever use the right tool for the job.  

Maintain all tools in a serviceable condition – if unserviceable either repair or replace.  

Control/protect tools with obvious risks (Stanley knives, etc).  

Use correct size spanners/sockets for nuts – if using adjustables, be extra cautious as these are  more prone to slipping.  

Always keep hands behind cutting edges when working.  

Grind down mushroomed heads of chisels, punches, etc to prevent splinters flying off.  

Do not use screwdrivers as chisels – handles splinter.  

Replace split or damaged wooden handles – do not tape or wire up.  

Regularly check hammerheads, etc for security of fixings.  

All files should be fitted with suitable wooden handles.  

Where necessary use specialist tools (insulated screwdrivers on live electrics).  

Protect sharp edges/points of tools.  

Keep tools in tool boxes or racks when not in use.  

Where applicable ensure suitable PPE is worn (eye protection, gloves, etc).  

 
 
  Storage of Flammable Material  
 
Many of the materials, liquids and substances which we use on sites are highly flammable, e.g.  solvents, diesel, AFR, paints and thinners, etc. These types of materials must be kept in secure containers. 
 
 

Containers used for flammable liquids should be clearly marked "HIGHLY FLAMMABLE".  

Any empty containers should be marked "EMPTY" and stored apart from the full containers.  

Small containers carrying highly flammable liquids should be stored in fire resistant cabinets or bins.  

Gas cylinders should be stored in the open air, out of direct sunlight and away from any sources of ignition.  

The cylinders should be stored in the upright position at all times.  

Any empty cylinders should be marked "EMPTY" and stored apart from the full cylinders.  

A sufficient number of dry powder extinguishers should be placed around the storage area.  

​

Where the cylinder cannot be stored in the open air, they should be kept in a storeroom which is constructed of noncombustible materials and is adequately ventilated. This storeroom should not be used for any other purpose than for the storage of LPG Gas or acetylene cylinders. 
 
Smoking is NOT permitted in storage areas where flammable liquids and materials are kept. 
 
Flammable or explosive liquids must not be discharged into drains. MSDS-Material Safety Data sheets shall also be displayed in the vicinity for the information of people. 

​

  Gas Cylinder Storage & Handling  
 
Compressed gases, are used extensively on our sites and provide a valuable source of energy. Misuse, however, can result in fires, serious accidents and injuries. 
 
   Important points: 

Treat all cylinders as full.  

Regularly inspect hoses, cylinders and valves for damage and wear and tear.  

The likes of Oxy/Acetylene cylinders should only be used by competent persons.  

Keep cylinders away from the sun, artificial heat, flammable materials, corrosive chemicals, etc.  

Do not smoke in vicinity.  

If a cylinder catches fire, then call the fire brigade. Cool the cylinder with water spray only, if safe to do so.  

Always have fire extinguishers located within reasonable proximity to any hot work being carried out. Use hot work permits if appropriate.  

Ensure everyone knows fire procedures including alarm signal, evacuation routes, assembly area, and correct use of fire extinguishers (including types!)  

Avoid damage to cylinder valves and fittings. Don’t use them as carrying aids.  

Open valves slowly and close sufficiently to cut off gas supply – do not use excessive force.  

Always secure acetylene cylinders in upright position.  

Ensure all cylinders are stored so that they cannot fall or roll.  

Consider manual handling of cylinders – they are heavy! Use a trolley for full size cylinders or get assistance.  

Always unload cylinders from lorries, vans, etc, by lifting – not by dropping/sliding.  

Transport cylinders in vehicles with good ventilation – ensure relevant signs (compressed gases) are clearly displayed on vehicles.  

​

  Housekeeping  
 
Tidiness is one of the foundation stones of safety and good environmental practice. Many accidents are caused through people tripping, slipping and falling over materials and equipment which should not have been left lying around. A great deal of environmental problems could be avoided if materials were disposed of properly instead of being allowed to escape into the surrounding area. 
 
This is an area where everyone on site can make a significant contribution to safety and the environment, merely by applying common sense.  
 

Do not leave rubbish lying about - clean up as you go. 

Ensure all waste is disposed of in the correct bin. 

Do not obstruct gangways, aisles or stairways with tools or materials.  

Make sure that spilled oil, grease or liquids are cleaned up from floors and the contaminated clean up material is disposed of in the correct bins.  

Gather up all off-cuts of timber, reinforcing bars, and any other material, and dispose of in the correct bins.  

When clearing up, make sure the refuse disposal point is in a safe position and all waste containers are clearly marked for their contents.  

Position all cables and hoses out of the way. Where possible do not lay them across a pedestrian walkway  

Look out for sparks and hot slag falling from welding, cutting and other hot work.  

Dispose of oil rags in metal containers.  

An accumulation of waste material provides a good starting point for fire. Do not let it happen.  

Ensure the waste disposal area is kept tidy and containers are removed in adequate time to prevent spillage.  

 
  Dust and Fumes  
 
Exposure to dust and fumes should be prevented where practicable, and must at least be controlled. Breathing in dust and fumes can have both acute and chronic effects, and can cause long-term health problems. 

​

Dusts arise from cutting, sanding and grinding operations, and can also be found when working with old lead pipes (lead oxide dust) or stripping out fibrous insulation (a prime, and very dangerous example being asbestos).                                                       

Fumes arise from a wider source of origins including welding operations, use of hazardous substances, heating metals such as lead, burning off old paints, etc.  

The effects vary greatly, but examples of potential hazards include lung disease from silica dust as a result of cutting concrete, cancer from cutting/sanding hardwood dust, metal fume fever from welding fumes, and lung cancer/asbestosis from exposure to asbestos, to name but a few.  

Where practicable, plan operations/tasks to eliminate exposure to dust and fumes.  

Where elimination is not practicable, then exposure to dusts and fumes must be controlled.  

Use tools with dust extraction systems if possible.  

Consider the use of portable extraction equipment.  

Consider use of local exhaust ventilation where practicable.  

As a last resort use personal protective equipment/respiratory protective equipment.  

Ensure it is suitable and that you know how to use it properly, and how to maintain it.  

Always remember other workers in the area – they may also require protection.         

 

  Fire Safety  
 
Fire is a major risk both to persons and to property. You can either help prevent fires, or you can help start/allow them. 
 
  Always: 

Ensure you are aware of the fire drill including the means of raising the alarm, escape routes, and the assembly point.  

Ensure you know where the nearest fire point is, what types of fire extinguisher are there, what types of fire they 

can be used on, and how they should be used (never put yourself at risk!)  

Never obstruct any fire points, fire doors or escape routes.

Never misuse or tamper with anything provided for fire prevention or fighting (never discharge fire extinguishers during horseplay).  

Don’t hang clothing/materials over or near heating equipment.  

Control rubbish – don’t let paper, rags, etc, accumulate.  

Store flammable liquids in suitable containers – well away from any sources of  ignition, keeps lids on containers when not in use.  

Control smoking – use designated areas if necessary.  

Don’t overload electrical sockets – one plug per socket!  

If electrical equipment is not in use then switch off at the mains  

Bitumen boilers, soldering irons, etc., must be placed on non-combustible stands.  

Carry out residual heat checks 30-60 minutes after any hot work has been carried out.  

Always have a fire extinguisher within arms reach when carrying out hot work.  

Obtain hot working permits where applicable.  

 
  Near Miss Reporting  
 
A Near Miss is an unplanned event that did not result in injury, illness, damage or product loss - but had the potential to do so. The difference between a near miss and an incident is often a fraction of a second or a fraction of an inch that may not be there the next time. Near misses are warnings of accidents in the making. By accepting these warnings and looking for their causes, we can prevent these situations recurring.

 

  The reason for Reporting 
 

The prevention and elimination of accidents can only be progressed by reporting the near misses as they occur.  

If the near misses are not reported, then no incident investigations will be carried out and none of the problems and warnings will be spotted. As a result, any learning points found cannot be communicated to others, who will therefore still be "at risk".  

A near miss can be considered as an indication that something is wrong, maybe with the system of work and it is important that everyone is "warned" by each near miss that occurs so that standards can be improved.  

​

  Accident Reporting  
 
It is a basic requirement for any management system that a corrective action system is in place in order to ensure lessons are learned from any incidents or hazards found, and then correct identified deficiencies, and realize any identified opportunity for improvement 
 
All the incidents irrespective of their nature / magnitude should be verbally reported  immediately by the injured or a person closely associated with the event to the supervisor and/ or Occupational Health Centre, based on the nature of the injury. 

​

When calling for ambulance the following information shall be given: 
                                                                                               

The exact location of the injured person  

Details about accident i.e. gas poisoning, bleeding, burn injury, fractures etc.  

Number of persons affected.  

 
If the concerned Supervisor is not available at the incident site, the witness to the incident shall then inform the Shift Incharge / concerned HOD about the incident.

​

  Working at Height  
 

  Fall Prevention & Protection  
 
What is Fall Prevention? 
 

The use of physical barriers which prevent people from falling.  

A device which prevents a person from being exposed to an open edge, hence preventing them from falling.  

 
Example: Elevated work platforms, scaffolds With proper railings, ladders – fixed & mobile, Man cage, safety belt which prevents person from reaching the fall zone 
 
What is Fall Protection? 
 

It’s a device or combination of devices used to arrest a person during a fall  

Devices/Equipment that can stop a fall in progress  

 
Example: Safety harness, lanyard, Self retractable reel, anchor points, safety nets, etc.  

 

  Full Body Harness  
 
Self-Inspection before use 
 

​Check labels to verify number and clearly legible.  

Check webbing and stitching - by flexing to easily highlight cuts, frays, pulled or broken threads, signs of abrasion, excessive wear, altered or missing parts, burns, heat and chemical exposures  

Check metallic components - D-ring, buckles, Carabiners for signs of deformation, fractures, cracks, corrosion, deep pitting, burrs, sharp edges, cuts, deep nicks, missing or loose parts and improper function.  

Check plastic components - back D-ring locator, chest strap guide, broken or excessively worn parts, loose parts, inspect for signs of burns and  excessive heat and chemical exposures  

Repeat the above for lanyards, and any knots that may not  

have been intended by the manufacturer 

IF AFTER INSPECTION YOU HAVE ANY DOUBTS SEEK ASSISTANT FROM A  COMPETENT PERSON 

 

Wearing the Harness

 

Hold the harness by the back D-ring. Shake the harness to allow all straps to fall in place.  

If chest, leg, and/or waist straps are buckled, release the straps and unbuckle. If chest, leg, and/or waist straps are buckled, release the straps and unbuckle  

Slip the straps over shoulders so the D-ring is located in middle of the back between shoulder blades  

Pull the leg strap between legs and connect to the opposite end. Repeat with the second leg strap. If belted harness, connect the waist strap after the leg straps. The waist strap should be tight, but not binding.  

Connect the chest strap and position in the mid-chest area. Tighten to keep the shoulder straps taut.  

After all straps have been buckled, tighten all buckles so the harness fits snugly but allows full range of movement. Pass excess strap through loop keepers,  

 
Anchorage Points  
 
Any fall protection system is only as good as its anchor point. All personaql fall protection system requires connection to an anchor point. It is essential that all anchor points have an adequate margin of strength and stability to withstand the dynamic and static forces that can be applied to them in service. 
 
An anchorage point is the securing point to a structure to which the fall arrest device or lanyard is attached.  Anchor points must be able to withstand a force of 15kN  
 
Some of the common anchor points are as follows: 
 

Purpose built anchor points  

Fully welded eye plates  

Steel structures of plant  

Girders, beams cleats 

Some of the unsuitable anchor points are as follows: 

 

Plant fixtures-Pipe hangers  
                                                                                              
Contract Safety Management-Handbook HZL/CCSM

Guardrails/ handrails  

Light gauge steel  

Sheet metal cladding  

Instrument lines  

Cable trays  

Water and other pipelines 

 
All anchor points should be identified and cer should be used for anchoring. Always use proper equipment for anchoring

​

Ladders 
 
Work may only be carried out from a ladder when the job is of short duration and can be done safely. 
 

Never overreach at the working position. 

Before using a ladder, inspect it to see that it is not damaged. 

Check for splits or cracks in the stiles and rungs. 

See that none of the rungs are missing or loose. 

It should not be painted as paint can hide damaged parts. 

Only industry standard ladders must be used. 

Check to ensure it has been placed the correct way up. 

Never attempt to repair damaged ladders. 

Ladders should be set on a firm base, resting at an angle which is not too steep and not too flat. Rule of thumb 1 out for 4 up.  

If the ladder cannot be tied at the top, it must be fixed at the bottom or a second person must foot the ladder before it is used.  

 When ladders are finished with, either board them up or remove them to stop children playing on them. 

Don't drop ladders.  

Ensure your footwear is free from excessive mud or grease before you climb the ladder

                                                                                               
Scaffoldings  
 
There are many different types of scaffolding in use today. 
 All scaffolds have the same basic rules:- 
 

Check that the platform is fully boarded out.  

Check that all necessary guard-rails are fitted.  

Check that all toe boards are fitted and in position.  

Check that all brick guards are in place.  

Check that the ladder provides suitable access and is tied to the scaffold.  

Check the scaffold has been erected on a sound base and that base plates and sole boards have been used.  

Use a scaffold only after it has been certified safe to use by a qualified person..  

If you find that a scaffold is unsafe report the faults to your supervisor so he can have them put right.  

Do not overload platforms with materials and keep platforms clear of debris.  

Alterations to scaffolds must only be carried out by persons who are competent to do so.  

At the end of the day remove access ladders or board them out to prevent children from playing on them. 