
Holi Safety Tips:

​

Holi is the festival of colours and to make the life more colourful & meaningful. Holi is to make the festival more joyous and enjoyable and not to cause inconvenience to others.

 

Here are a few tips and suggestions to make your holi safe and joyous.

 

Play safe. Don't get to boisterous and do not let others to be rude on you.

The best option would be to play with natural homemade colours. Your skin and hair will feel tampered with the use of skin friendly natural products.

If natural colours are not possible, then ensure a better quality of colours. Buy colours from a reputed shop or vendor.

Make sure that your face is well creamed before and after the play.

Apply thick coating of paint on your nails - both in fingers and toes so that they remain protected.

Oil your hair well, so that colour doesn't stick on your hair and can be washed off easily later.

Cover your hair. Make use of hat or caps to protect your hair from being coloured with hard-to-rinse dyes.

Make sure that powder or any other product does not get inside your eyes. Eyes are extremely vulnerable on Holi because of their strategic place in body and also because of the use of harmful chemicals in colours these days. Please ensure that your eyes remain protected at all times. Use a sunglass to protect your eyes from a misfire of colour filled darts or water jets.

Use dental caps to save your teeth from any unwanted stains.

Put on your worst clothes so that you won't have to take on the hassles of an immediate washing.

Rags like tattered denims and bright shades like black, blue, green, purple are highly recommended.

Try to save yourself off from all possible attacks on the face. In case such attempts fail, keep your eyes and lips tightly shut if you are attacked on your face.

If possible avoid going outside your home, at least for the peak hours of celebration. The premises of your home ensure that you are safe from pouncing hooligans, even friends who can be a little rough on the day.

When traveling keep the car windows thoroughly shut, even if you don't have an AC car. Do not bump into the frenzied group of mob if you take to streets. Better you cross the road to the sidewalk across. Or, simply stay at a safe distance.

Do not use permanent dyes. If someone has applied it on you, do not rub the face with soap immediately in order to get rid of it, especially when it is wet. Instead, use good quality cleansing milk for removal. It's better than using soap, which will dry up your skin.

Rotten eggs when thrown on your head, flying missiles from locality buildings…are still not too bad, will be smelly yet is a good conditioner for your hair. But tar, shit, Mobil, stones and all the rubbish that you can be hit with is not. Avoid being a prey to hooligans.

Remember you also have police on your side and if any untoward revellers misbehave, you can make your complaint. Mark out the locality, building and if possible the person.

Take a bath much later after the entire Holi celebration is over. Taking frequent baths, washing the face again and again, will ruin your skin. You will also lose hair, for too much soap/shampoo has a drying effect.

If you are prone to skin allergies, avoid playing with gulal altogether. Going to a dermatologist (skin specialist) serves no purpose, after the damage is done.

Avoid running on jumping on wet floors, so that you don't slip and injure yourself. Bones are especially vulnerable on this day.

Avoid overindulgence in bhang, drinks or food... so that you don't repent later.

Do not drive if you are high on alcohol or bhang.

 
Chemical colours & its harmful effects:
​
Green colour is obtained from copper sulphate         : May cause allergies in eye or even                                                                                                                                                        temporary blindness.
Purple is obtained from chromium iodide                 : May cause bronchial asthma or other

                                                                         forms of allergy.

Silver is obtained from aluminium bromide               : It is a known carcinogenic.
 

Black is obtained from lead oxide                          : May cause renal failures or learning

                                                                         disability.

Red is obtained from mercury sulphide                     : May cause skin cancer, mental retardation, paralysis, impaired vision.
 

Shiny Colours are a result of powdered glass being added to the colours.

Besides, many water colours have an alkaline base capable of causing severe injuries. Colours in the form of pastes have toxic compounds mixed in a base of engine oil or other inferior quality oil, capable of causing skin allergy, temporary blindness.

Further, when washed, these colours containing toxic chemicals enter the river, thereby soil and water pollution.

Even the way we play Holi is becoming dangerous. Throwing water filled balloons has become rampant, which is very harmful. People should realise, what is fun for them could cause injury to the eyes and ears to the other person, especially when thrown from a distance and with force.

​

DIWALI Celebrations  OHSE Tips: 


 Special precautions should be taken at the time of Diwali celebrations specially when bursting fire crackers. A few simple prevention measures are outlined below which would help you in celebrating this festival safely. 
 
Fire Safety/Firework accident Prevention: 
 
The Do’s

​

1, Make sure you buy Fireworks from a licensed shop.

2, Always keep the fireworks in a closed box.

3, Store crackers away from sources of fire or ignition also keep them away from the reach of children.

4, Read the instructions and follow all safety precautions recommended for the use of fireworks.

5, Light crackers in open spaces.

6, While lighting the crackers stand at an arm’s length from the cracker.

7, Discard used fireworks in a bucket of water. In this manner you can avoid people from stepping on to and hurting their feet from used fireworks which are thrown on the ground.

8, Keep buckets of water and blankets ready, in case a firebreaks out.

9, Wear heavier cotton clothes while lighting crackers so as to ensure maximum safety from fire.

10, If your clothes happen to catch fire, do not panic, drop down on the ground and roll.

11, Store water and keep it ready near the place of fireworks celebrations.

12, Keep a wet towel ready to cover your exposed parts when some crackers may accidentally burst.

13, Keep the regulators of your cooking gas cylinders turned off and do not keep the cylinders in balconies or open spaces to keep them protected from stray rockets.

14,Put earplugs (or cotton wool) in your ears.

15. Keep small portable extinguishers handy for urgent use.
 
The Don’ts

​

1, Don’t burn crackers in crowded, congested places, narrow lanes, near sources of fire or inside the house.

2, Don’t put fireworks in your pocket.

3, Don’t cover crackers with tin containers or glass bottles for extra sound effect.

4, Don’t examine un-burst crackers…leave it!! Light a new cracker

5, Don’t light crackers on your hands. People have a tendency of lighting the fuses by bringing the cracker to the candle or incense rather than bringing the candle or incense to the fuse. Moving the candle of the incense to the fuse is the recommended method.

6, Avoid long loose clothes as they may get caught up in the fireworks and can catch fire.

7, In the event that someone is burnt, don’t remove burnt clothing (unless it comes off easily), but do ensure that the victim is not still in contact with smouldering materials.

8, Don’t try to burst the blisters.

9, The earthen lamps lit on Diwali night are generally placed on balcony and window ledges. Ensure that these are not near any flammable material like wood, cloth or paper. 
10, Usually, decorative lights and electric lights should never be tied to any metal poles as any current leak can energize the pole and give a shock to anyone who touches the pole.

11, Fireworks and alcohol don't mix: Drinking alcohol presents an added danger when there are fireworks and bonfires around. So don't drink during your fireworks display.

12, Don't light flying fireworks if there is a heavy wind.
 
Fire safety and children:

​

1, Make sure a responsible adult whom the children listen to, is present when they are bursting firecrackers. Children often tend to listen to their favourite aunt or uncle on these matters.

2, Warn your children against lighting crackers while holding them in their hands.

3, And last, but not least, remember that Diwali is a festival to be enjoyed by all.

So, celebrate in a manner that does not cause inconvenience or harm to your neighbours.
 
Diwali and Pets:

 

Pets get very frightened and jittery (and then occasionally become violent) on fireworks night, so keep all your pets indoor and close all the curtains to make things calmer. Remember it's not just your own fireworks that cause distress, so you may have to have your pets indoors on several nights when other displays are taking place.
 
First Aid:

 

Burns are usually divided into three categories depending on how much of the skin they affect. Superficial burns (first degree) affect the surface of the skin, making it red, swollen, and painful. This sort of burn can be treated at home and usually heals in between 7-10 days. Partial (second degree) and full thickness (third degree) burns are much more serious, and require medical attention. 
 
Treating minor burns

1, Cool the skin using cool, or tepid, water for between 10-30 minutes, ideally within 20 minutes of the injury happening. This will prevent the burn getting worse.

2, Do not use ice, iced water, creams, or greasy substances, such as butter to sooth the burn. A cool bath, or shower, will help to soothe the burn.

3, If fingers or toes are burned, try and separate them with dry, sterile, non-adhesive dressings.  Avoid any kind of friction or pressure on the burnt area.

4, If the burn is painful, taking a mild painkiller, such as paracetamol, or ibuprofen, can help. However, always check the packaging to make sure that you take the correct dosage.

5, Do not interfere with the burn, or break any blisters. If the burn is very painful, or seems to be getting worse Rush the victim to the hospital immediately.

6, Deep, or large burns, or burns to the face, hands, or across joints, must always be checked by a doctor and may require hospital treatment.

​

                                                              A parent's Guide to Mobile Safety:

​

It seems just about everybody has a mobile phone now, including more than three-quarters of teens and a rapidly growing number of younger kids. For young people as well as adults, the technology has changed the way we work, play, communicate, learn, and socialize. Even the term “smartphone” is a bit of an understatement, with all that its hundreds of thousands of applications allow us to do—track flights, do homework, stay fit, take tutorials, avoid traffic, find recipes, read books, or share moments and play games together across vast distances. 
 
Mobile phones also help keep us and our kids safe. They enable us to call for help in an emergency, find our way when we’re lost and help family members keep track of each other. Phones can even be used to help parents know the speed at which a teen is driving the family car. You don’t need us to tell you that they’ve become an indispensable part of our lives.  
 
While the overwhelming majority of young people are using their phones responsibly, it's natural for parents to worry about how their kids are using such powerful devices. As with any other powerful tool, there are risks, but through responsible use, they can be minimized. That’s why we created this guide.

​

Today’s mobile ecosystem means shared responsibility:

 

        The mobile ecosystem now has many moving parts, each of which has a role to play in cell phones users' safety, privacy and security. In addition to the service providers themselves, there are the companies that make the devices and operating systems (like Android, iOS and Windows) and the makers of the hundreds of thousands of apps people can download to their phones. Even the makers of smartphones' Web browsers play a role, because they make it possible to access millions of websites, send and receive messages and have voice or chat conversations from any Wi-Fi hotspot—even where there's no cellular service.  
 
There are two other very important players in this ecosystem where families are concerned: you and your children. More than ever, it’s up to the user to determine what to do with a smartphone and how to use it safely. Safety, privacy and security are now very much a shared responsibility in families, among friends and between users and all the other parts of the mobile ecosystem.

 

How kids use mobile phones:        

 

The best way to find out how your kids are using their phones is to ask them. Activities popular with kids include photo and video sharing, texting, gaming, and a growing number of social networking apps that are not limited to the ones you might have heard of, such as Facebook and Twitter. It's all about sharing and socializing because, as kids get into their pre-teens, their interests are more and more social. The good news is, if they have cellphones at that age, their use is embedded in everyday life—mostly school life—and the people they're interacting with are typically friends and peers they know from school and other parts of their lives you know about. And sometimes they even use their phones to help with homework. So even though apps come and go and technology changes, the parenting part hasn't changed much. You still need to be the parent, ask questions, and set limits. Just know that what goes on with phones is more about people and relationships than about technology. As for the technology part, our kids are usually pretty happy to help us out with that.

 
Your child’s first phone:

 

There are lots of things to think about when parents consider buying kids their first cellphones. Of course the “right time” and the right phone vary by child, his or her maturity level and the family budget. Some parents want their young children to have a phone so they can call or be reached at any time. Others prefer to wait till they're teens. Factors to consider include: whether a child can use a phone with respect for the device, your rules and the people they interact with on it; if he or she can stay within the usage allowances included in the service plan and whether the child knows when to turn the phone off (e.g., at bedtime). 
 
For young kids, you could consider getting a simple “feature phone” rather than a smartphone. Though they can be used for texting, these basic phones are mainly for just talking—kids can’t use them to download third party apps, some don’t have cameras, and they’re less expensive if you need to replace them. It’s likely that your kids—especially teens and preteens—will want a smartphone and access to apps and, depending on your cellphone plan, you may be able to get them one and add it to your family plan at a fairly low cost. But do consider establishing rules about what apps are appropriate, using parental-control tools and discussing how to keep usage within the family's cellphone plan.        

 
Helping kids protect their safety, privacy and security:

 

Young people tend to use their devices safely most of the time, but it's always good to talk over the key issues, even revisit them now and then as your kids change and grow: 
 
• Communicate with care. Whether it’s by voice, text, a social networking or photo-sharing app, there are plenty of ways kids can interact with people they know and—in some cases— don’t know. If a child is being contacted by someone who might be harassing or bullying them, there are usually ways to block that person, through your cellphone company, the app or both. They probably do, but be sure your kids know who is and isn't appropriate to interact with on their phones as well as online. Younger children may need contact lists you set up with people you pre-approve.  
 
• Limit who can locate you. All modern phones are equipped with geolocation technology that can pinpoint the phone’s location. That can enhance safety and convenience by allowing parents to track kids, users to find lost phones and first responders to find people in an emergency (with Enhanced 911, or "E911"). There are also apps that use location or share it with other users or companies. With the exception of E911, it’s possible to turn off geolocation, either for the entire phone or just for specific apps. You and your kids can review the apps on their phones to see which apps share location. If you’re uncomfortable with any of them, you can try to turn off the app’s location feature or just delete the app.  
 
• Lock your phone. One of the simplest ways to protect privacy and security is to password-protect a phone with a numeric code, gesture, password, or fingerprint so no one else can use it. In addition to protecting the information on your phone, the password also protects you. Locking a phone prevents others from using kids' phones to impersonate them, possibly to bully or play "jokes" on others in their name, or to post images or comments that could embarrass them. Tell them never to share that password with anyone—even friends— because sometimes friends make mistakes or become ex-friends. 
 
• Be app-savvy. When you’re downloading apps, look at the reviews and pay special attention to the permissions they seek. Do a bit of Web searching to see if an app you’re installing is from a reputable developer, and only download apps from official sources like Google Play or the Apple App Store. Even then, be careful because not all apps in these stores are appropriate for all users. As you install an app, it may ask you whether it can do such things as access your calendar, contact list, or location—or whether it can post on your behalf to a social networking service. In many cases, you can choose not to, but with some apps, your only choice is to agree to all the permissions or cancel the installation. Either way, you have a choice. You and your children can periodically review the apps on their phones together and consider deleting any that you’re not comfortable with. There are also parental controls (see below) that can help you manage your child’s use of apps.   • Share thoughtfully. Whether they're using photo- and video-sharing apps or commenting in social media apps, kids need to know that what they post is a reflection on them. Talk with them about respecting their own and others' dignity and privacy by being aware of 
what they’re "saying" with both words and images. We all need to ask permission before sharing pictures of others and think about how they affect our own and others' reputations. 
 
• Use strong passwords everywhere. Even if your phone is locked, make sure you have strong passwords for apps or sites that access any personal information, because people can access these services from other devices too. Use strong passwords that are easy to remember and hard to guess (i.e., use symbols, mix upper- and lower-case letters), and don’t use the same password for every app, service, or website. You’ll find suggestions at Passwords.ConnectSafely.org. 
 
• Consider the costs. Sign up for a plan that's appropriate for your children’s voice, data and texting needs, and check in periodically to make sure they stay within their plan’s allowances. It’s a good discipline that can offer early financial literacy lessons. Also consider whether a contract plan or prepaid plan is right for your child. If your plan has a data limit, consider using Wi-Fi when possible. KnowMyApp.org has more advice and offers data usage estimates for popular apps. Have a family policy about spending money on apps and in-app purchases. Even "free" apps can cost money if they allow your child to make purchases within a game or other kind of app. Some families have a rule that kids can’t download an app without a parent's permission. 
 
• Protect the device with a good, strong case and consider getting some type of insurance through your cellphone company or a third party, in case the phone is lost, stolen or damaged. 
 
Use a phone finder app. There are free apps that can help you locate a lost phone, make it ring even if it’s in silent mode, erase the contents and lock it so that an unauthorized person can’t use it. Some include additional security features. Go to ConnectSafely.org/mobile for instructions on how to use Apple’s Find My iPhone app and Google’s Android Device Manager that come with recent models of these phones.         Pa rental       controls There are actually two major types of parental controls. The first is family rules or guidelines that you establish with your children, and the second is technology tools provided by cellphone companies, smartphone makers, and app developers. In many ways, the first kind is more effective, because it involves teaching your children self-regulation and -protection, which are with them wherever they go and can last a lifetime. Monitoring and Web filtering apps are available, but don't let them give you a false sense of security because they're no substitute for the resilience, moral compass and cognitive filter kids develop for their own well-being. If you do use technology to monitor or limit their phone activities, in most cases it’s a good idea to be up front with your kids about it and revisit it every now and then as they mature. 
 
Because phones have Web browsers, they can be used to view any type of Web content, including content you might consider inappropriate for your children. Establishing rules and talking with your kids about appropriate use is baseline safety. Depending on the device, if you make yourself the administrator of your child's phone and put the settings behind a password, you can block Web browsing and other functions altogether and decide if they can download apps, among other options. This may be a big factor in deciding what phone you give your child. 
 
Using filtering or time-management apps can be really helpful with some kids. There are also parental-control tools that enable parents to know what kids are texting, what sites they’re visiting and what apps they’re using, as well as tools that enable you to locate your child when he or she isn’t home. 
 
To find parental-control tools, contact your mobile phone company to see what it offers, or visit GrowingWireless.com for a list of wireless parental-control tools. You can also search for "parental controls," "monitoring" or "filtering" in the app store on your child's phone. Look for apps' ratings or users' reviews to see if they're worth downloading (even if they're free); see if they have privacy policies or if their descriptions say anything about how the app will use your data. You’ll find links to app stores and other resources at ConnectSafely.org/mobile. Two       kinds       of       safety        The best way to stay safe when using a cellphone is to use good sense and stay alert. The only real risk to physical safety is distraction. Don't just tell your teens not to text while driving, model it! Texting while driving is extremely dangerous.  
 
Thoughtful, balanced use of phones is good for us in lots of ways: It can help kids get enough sleep (when phones are off), keep grades up and allow time for exercise—and we all know that ignoring your phone occasionally can be good for relationships.  
 
Another form of safety is the social kind. As every child and parent knows, social media can turn into anti-social media, so family conversations about keeping social lives positive need to include the interaction that happens on digital devices too. As a society we're all learning that anonymity and a lack of visual cues doesn't mean we can treat others differently or stop being respectful. It doesn't mean that these aren't fellow human beings behind our texts, posts, photos, avatars, and comments. The same social practices that maintain good relations in offline life support everybody's well-being in digital spaces too. If you want additional help, check out our guide for dealing with cyberbullying at ConnectSafely.org/guides. Some       closing       thoughts               These days, parenting needs to be as dynamic and adaptive as our kids and their favorite technologies are. What works to help one child might flop when tried with another kid. And what helps a boy when he’s 11 can hold him back when he’s 14. Just as childhood represents a process of ongoing growth, parenting is a process of ongoing calibration. 
 
In the advice above, we mentioned a lot of external protections—from parental-control tools to phone settings to family rules. What isn't considered enough is the internal kind of safeguards parents have always helped kids develop: self-respect, resilience, empathy, manners, and a moral compass—that inner guidance system that protects them long after they grow up and leave home. They work really well with any technology our kids use, and—though they can be challenging to model and teach— they're not new, and rapid change in kids and technology only increases their value.  
 
Parents' Top 5 Questions About Mobile Phones:

              
 1. What's the best age to get a child his or her first cell phone? 
 The short answer is, “it depends.” Only you can know if your child is mature enough to follow family rules, take care of the phone and not lose it. Another major factor is whether the child understands how to use the phone in a way that considers the feelings and rights of others. 
 
The average age of kids getting their first mobile phones keeps going down. It was 16 a decade ago; in 2009 it was about 12, according to the latest available data from Pew Research Center. More recent (2013) Pew Research found that 68% of 12-13 year-olds own a cellphone and 23% a smartphone, while 83% of older teens (14-17) have cellphones and 44% have smartphones. 
 
2. How can I limit or monitor what my kids do with their cellphones? 
In addition to family rules and lots of communication, there are parental-control tools you can use to block access to websites and apps; monitor what kids are doing (including texting) and control who can call them. You can check with your cellphone company and search for third-party parental-control tools in app stores to find what’s available. If you do use a parental-control tool, we recommend you tell your child why you’re using it. Also seriously consider how much information is too much. Some monitoring apps record a user's every keystroke—even in text messages. Think about whether you really need to know the content of every text.

  
3. How can I make sure my child's privacy is protected? 
There are two types of privacy protection—the kind that can be set or installed on a phone and the kind that develops in a child's head. Privacy settings in apps and on phones can provide control over use of your child's data, and parental controls can give you more control or oversight over his or her phone activities. Locking a phone reduces the risk of it being used by someone to impersonate the phone's owner or bully others.  
The second kind—learning how to protect your and your friends' privacy—is just as important because the information users post and share with their smartphones has just as much impact on privacy as settings and other tech safeguards. Helping our kids share information carefully, showing respect for themselves and others, spells real protection of both privacy and well-being. It helps to be up front with your kids about the measures you take and learn together what rules and tools best keep their mobile phone use positive and constructive.

 
4. How can I make sure my child only uses apps that are safe and appropriate? 
The best way to ensure that your kids are using safe and appropriate apps is to talk with them about each app they use or want to use and do a little research to make sure it’s appropriate. You can look at reviews in the mobile app stores, search the Web for information about an app or talk with friends who have used it. You could also have a rule that no app gets downloaded without a parent's permission or use parental controls to put app-downloading behind a password so that your child can only download one with your help. But even some appropriate apps can be misused, so kids still need to make sure that what they share doesn’t jeopardize their privacy and security.

 
5. How do I control the cost of my child's cell phone service and apps? 
First, review your cell phone plan to make sure it’s appropriate for your child’s use. Factors to consider are limited or unlimited texting, the number of voice minutes and how much data can be used each month. Consider calling Customer Service at your service provider to make sure you 
have the right plan for your family. Also talk with your kids about Wi-Fi, which enables them to use their mobile devices to watch video or download apps or content without incurring the cost of cellular data use. People can also run up costs buying and using apps, so consider having a family policy that addresses spending money for or within apps or setting a password (your kids don’t know) that keeps them from buying apps or spending money via “in-app purchases” that can sometimes really add up. Setting limits on your child's use can help keep costs under control. 

 

                                                                   Women's Safety:

Why Women's safety is required:

​

      Over the past few years, incidents of crime against women have been on the upswing in India. More and more women are joining the urban workforce and safety of women continues to be a major area of concern, in spite of many regulations laid down by the Government. 


     In key economic centres of the country like Delhi, Gurgaon, Mumbai, Bengaluru, Hyderabad, Chennai and Pune, there has been an increase in the number of cases of harassment and molestation being reported. However, conviction rates are poor because of the poor judicial system, faulty methods of collecting forensic evidence and limited use of modern technology. 


    Most cases of sexual harassment at home, work or public places are often not reported due to cultural inhibitions in many parts of the country; where the stigma is attached to the victim rather than the perpetrator of the crime, who often gets away. 



1, Safety Awareness 

2, Crimes Against Women 

3, Legal Guidelines 

4, Sexual Harassment at Workplace 

5, Self Defence Techniques:


Safety Awareness:

“FLIGHT, not FIGHT” If you recognise a situation as potentially unsafe, run away or get away from there.


But if you can't run immediately,

                                           Defend, Disarm & Disappear 

                                                                       You Can and Should defend yourself

                                                                                                                  Alert, Anticipate & Avoid If you are ALERT,                         you can ANTICIPATE potential problems and AVOID unpleasant situations When in doubt SHOUT out ALOUD!

General Awareness: 

 

1, Be aware of your habits, surroundings, potential attackers and his likely behaviour

2, Trust your instincts

3, Remember - your age and dress isn't a barrier.  It CAN happen!

4, Don't run from danger, run towards safety

5, You can reduce your risks, not eliminate them  

6, If you have to  fight back, you must know HOW to fight back  

Tips to Stay Safe!

 

1, Have a confident body posture, you shouldn’t appear an easy target

2, Speed dial –your personal helpline is a must

3, Carry emergency contact information: company HR contact, immediate family member contact, medical assistance number

4, Use GPS and safety Apps on your mobile effectively

5, Never move out without a fully charged mobile phone.

 
Vehicle Safety:

​

1, Check your after receiving from valet parking,

2, Approach your car with the keys ready,

3, Avoid travelling through deserted areas,

4, Don't unlock your from a distance,

5, Check your fuel tank.



Safety During Travel in Public Transport:

​

1, Remain alert. Try not to sleep - listen to music, talk to someone

2, Keep your eye on the road while travelling in an auto/taxi

3, If the ladies compartment is empty, board the general compartment instead

4, A torch is handy if the lights go off


Travelling Outstation:

 

1, Ensure your family members and business associates know your itinerary

2, Plan your travel in such a way that your journey ends before last light

3, Making sure you have enough cell phone battery life before leaving one location to last until you get to another.

4, Pre-check your route before you travel in a different town. Use GPS if necessary


Safety in a Hotel:

 

1, Pre-arrange all hotel information at the destination before boarding

2, Request a room with a peephole and safety chain

3, Don't invite associates/strangers to your room, prefer meeting them in common areas like lobby

4, Check for hidden cameras and check mirrors


Safety in Public Places:

 

1, Don't wear expensive jewellery when you are alone.

2, While in changing rooms of malls, be sure to check for a two-way mirror.

3, If you have a daily walking schedule, change the routes you take. Break the pattern.

4, If you need to wait for a while, stay indoors rather than on road or bus sto


Safety at Social Gatherings

 

1, Don't leave your drink unattended. If you need to move away from your drink, finish it/carry it/leave it.

2, Ensure that your arrangements for drop and pick-up are made well in advance

3, Inform your family/ colleague/friend about whom you are with and your expected time of return

4, Wear clothes that you can travel home alone in, or carry a simple change (flat shoes, a stole and leggings)


Safety at Home: 

 

1, Look through the peep hole before you open the door

2, Don't let your milkman, watchman enter your house; receive them at the main door

3, Do not leave the door unattended

4, Make sure you lock your door before turning back

5, Receive your parcels at the main door

6, Dress modestly when you answer the door

 
Social Media Harassment: 

 

1, Don't ever put too many personal details on Facebook, Google, LinkedIn, or other social networking as they might get misused.

2, Update your privacy settings regularly

3, Virtual to real - never go alone to meet someone you met online!

4, Always make two kinds of online presence: a professional presence for your colleagues and clients; and a private presence meant for socializing.

 

Crimes against women According to the law in India, crimes against women can be classified as:
 

Molestation:
 

If a man has physically touches your body with a sexual overture 


Eve Teasing:

 

If the offender utters any sound/word or makes certain gestures or shows certain objects to insult your modesty


Stalking:

 

When someone is following, contacting or attempting to contact you, despite repeated indication of disinterest from your side


Voyeurism:

​

Whoever watches or captures your image while engaging in a private act, when you would expect not to be observed


Sexual Assault: 

 

When a woman is coerced, forced, threatened, against her will to participate in any involuntary sexual activity with a man


Sexual Harassment at the Workplace:

  
Unwelcome sexual behaviour that negatively affects your work life


Cruelty by Husband or Relatives:

  
Dowry demands and other related harassment


Dowry Death: 

 

Women who are murdered or driven to suicide by continuous harassment and torture by husband or his relatives
 

Kidnapping & Abduction:


Taking away of a woman by force against her will
 

Rape:
 

Sexual intercourse against a person's consent


Crime Against Women


OFFENCE                          Section                                       ACT                                 Punishment
 

Molestation                        354                                             IPC                             Minimum: One year

                                                                                                                            Maximum: Five years and fine                                            
Eve teasing                         509                                            IPC                             Imprisonment for three years and fine
 

Stalking                            354(D)                                          IPC                             Minimum: One year

                                                                                                                            Maximum: Three years and fine
 

Voyeurism                          354©                                          IPC                              Minimum:One year

                                                                                                                            Maximum: Three years and fine
Cruelty by husband or

relative of the husband          498-A                                         IPC                              Maximum: Five years and fine

Murder                               302                                           IPC                              Life imprisonment and / or death with fine
 

Dowry death                       304-B                                        IPC                               Minimum: Seven years Maximum: Imprisonment for life

Rape and Murder                 376-A                                       IPC                              Minimum: Twenty years Maximum: Imprisonment for life

Attacking a woman by       326-A                                       IPC                               Imprisonment for not less than 10 years which may extent                                                                                                                           to life imprisonment and fine not exceeding 10,00,000

dangerous weapon or

substance like acid

 

Amendment to suicide           306                                        IPC                    Minimum: One year Maximum: Three years and fine                                                                                                                            




LEGAL GUIDELINES


FIR: An FIR is a written document prepared by a police officer when he receives information about a cognizable offence.

1, FIR must include all relevant details like date, time and place of the incident, identity of the accused, if any

2, FIR can be lodged by a witness as well

3, The police officer is bound to read out the FIR to you, preferably in your own language and confirm your assent before you sign it.

4, You are entitled to a copy of FIR, free of cost

5, The FIR must be duly stamped and signed by the Duty Officer .

Lodge an FIR at the nearest Police Station as soon as possible FIR
In case of rape, do not wash your Body or Clothes.
If the police refuse to cooperate, don't be rude or aggressive; tell them firmly and politely that you are aware of your rights

Know Your Rights:

​

1, Police is bound to file a report by a rape victim and listen to her grievances

2, You cannot be arrested without a lady police officer or constable being present. (CrPC Sec 51 and 100)

3, You can be searched only by a lady police officer/constable (CrPC Sec 51) ŸMedical examination can be conducted only in presence or supervision of a female doctor (Sec 54)

4, No arrests after sunset and before sunrise

5, Throughout the process your identity can't be revealed (IPC Sec 228A), applicable for rape victims

6, You can't be called to the police station for interrogation (CrPC Sec 160(1) )

7, A woman has the right to give her statement to the police in private (CrPC Sec 164)


Sexual Harassment at the Workplace:


Whom do you complain to?

Any women who feels that she is a victim of sexual harassment can file a complaint to her company’s. Internal Complaint Committee


What should the complaint cover?

The written (or on email) complaint should contain a description of each incident(s). It should include:

1, Relevant dates

2, Timings and locations

3, Name of the respondent(s) and

4, The working relationship between the parties

​

What to expect from the Committee?
When it comes to redress for workplace sexual harassment, employee has a right to expect:

1, A trained, skilled and competent Complaints Committee

2, A time bound process

3, Information confidentiality

4, Assurance of non-retaliation

5, Counselling or other enabling support where needed

6, Assistance if the complainant opts for criminal proceedings

 




The aim of self defence is to prevent harm to yourself, cause severe momentary pain to the attacker; and make a quick getaway to a safer location, without being pursued by the attacker.

​

Self Defence Tips:


1, Keep a balanced body posture so that the attacker cannot easily force you to the ground

2, When in a situation of potential danger, keep your belongings lose together and tucked under your arm. Keep your master hand free to defend yourself

3, Practice defensive techniques regularly with friends/family/colleagues to keep yourself ready

4, Remember to shout NO loudly. It attracts attention of others, scares the attacker and gives you confidence

5, Aim for the vulnerable parts of the attacker's body

6, Aim and strike! The strike should be with maximum force to inflict severe pain on the attacker so that he's dissuaded from pursuing you further 7, Remember – Hit hard!! He was trying to harm you

7, Do not stay back to beat the attacker to a pulp – escape to a safe place Defend Yourself

 

Hit Where it Hurts

​

1, Using the base of your palm as a weapon

Targets:Nose, jaw and throat

 

2, Elbow strikes

Targets:Face, jaw, solar plexus

 

3, Using your knee as a weapon  

Target:Groin

 

4, Leg kick & heel stamp

Target:knee, shin and toes

Common Questions about Pepper Spray:

​

1.Is pepper spray legal in India? Can i get punished for using it?

A.Pepper spray is legal in India, provided you use it for self defence. However, you should also check if your company has a policy about it.


2.Is it dangerous? Will it kill or harm a person?

A.Pepper spray temporarily incapacitates (Indian pepper spray's are made of natural chilly extracts). Remember, the person you are using it against was trying to harm you!


3.Where can I buy it?

A.You can buy it in medical stores or even order online. Some of the common brands are “Knock out” and “Cobra”.


4.Can I carry it on flights with me?

A.It is advisable to put it in your check in baggage; airports do not permit it in the hand baggage.


5.Is there anything else I need to know about pepper spray?

A.Keep it away from children who may accidentally use it and if you have to use it, spray it away from you at arm's length.


What's in Your Purse (Potential Weapons) ?

1, Pen

2, Pencil

3, Nail filer

4, Bangles

5, Comb

6, Keys  

7, Phone charger  

8, Mobile phone

9, Scarf

10, Ear phones

11, Deodorant

12, Pin


MitKat's Women's Safety Training


We have evolved a unique Women's Safety Awareness and Self-Defence Training session; which has already been effectively used for training women in various corporate entities. 


 


Module 1:Evasion, Avoidance and Deterrence (this would be an interactive discussion cum presentation)


Module 2:General self-defence training (this would be a practical session with demonstrations and full participation by all trainees) 


Module 3:Using common implements and accessories for protection (this would be a practical session with demonstrations)