
HSE Management:

Health, Safety and Environmental (HSE) Management is an integral and essential part of the way we do our business and is considered an equal part of the wider system for the management of our business.

Through effective management, Ensign aims to be the preferred contractor and the favoured employer. The requirements set out in this document constitute the expectations for divisional compliance with Ensign policy.
The purpose of this is to describe:

The structure for the management of Health, Safety and Environmental (HSE) within the company's.

The expectations for each element of the HSE Management System.

It is the responsibility of each company is to determine how these expectations and requirements are to be achieved.

The HSE Management System defines the elements by which we will conduct our operations worldwide in order to protect our people, the public, our property and the environment in which they work and live.

The HSE Management System model is comprised of seven interrelated elements with underlying expectations:
1. Commitment and Leadership
2. Policies and Objectives
3. Organization, Resources and Documentation
4. Risk Evaluation and Management
5. Planning
6. Implementation, Recording and Monitoring
7. Audit and Review
Each company must communicate these expectations to all employees, customers and third parties associated with our business. Each company must provide positive evidence of conformance to this Management System and continuous improvement.

Commitment and Leadership:

Management shall provide strong visible commitment, leadership and personal involvement in health, safety and the environment. Management shall make available the resources necessary to achieve our HSE objectives.

Expectations
Set a personal example day to day by following HSE rules.
Make decisions that consider HSE matters equal to cost, quality, morale and production.
Delegate the necessary authority to the appropriate personnel and allocate resources to carry out HSE functions.
Visit operations on a regular basis to demonstrate commitment and recognize performance in HSE matters.
Hold those in positions of authority accountable at all levels of the company for compliance with company policies and global standards.
Develop HSE objectives at your level of responsibility.
Communicate with employees, clients, subcontractors and industry personnel so that they know and understand the intent of HSE policies.
Celebrate and promote your HSE success.   

Policies and Objectives:
Say what you are going to do. Develop and communicate policies demonstrating a commitment to HSE that is consistent with, and at least equal to, other business aims. Supporting objectives shall be defined, deployed and maintained at all organizational levels.

Expectations
Develop local HSE policies that support and are consistent with corporate standards.
Set objectives for continuous improvement.
Involve all levels of management and personnel in the development of objectives for the division.
Develop specific objectives for the reduction of risk.
Communicate the policies and objectives to all employees in a clear, readily understood, medium.
Develop performance measures to guide and gauge progress towards achieving objectives.
Meet and strive to exceed regulatory requirements in all jurisdictions.
Review policies and objectives at all levels on a regular basis, to determine continued validity.   

Organization, Resources and Documentation:
Define, document and communicate the roles, responsibilities and accountabilities to enable every individual to fulfill their role in improving HSE performance.

Expectations
Define the interrelationships between individuals, operating groups, support functions, employees, clients and partners in joint activities, trade associations and regulatory bodies.
Appoint and support a management team representative to act as the focal point for HSE matters.
Ensure that each group and individual receives sufficient information and training to fulfill their role with respect to HSE.
Allocate sufficient resources to support policies and work towards achieving objectives set for HSE issues.
Ensure a system that provides and maintains effective procedures, resource material and records on HSE subjects.     

Risk Evaluation and Management:

Continually evaluate the HSE risks to the workforce, customers and the environment. Continually evaluate processes and activities for specific hazards – assess potentials, record and control the subsequent risk to a tolerable level.
Expectations
Establish a methodology that identifies both acute and chronic hazards and their associated impacts. Address routine and non-routine tasks, emergencies and outside influences.
Conduct hazard assessments during the design, development, operating and decommissioning stages of equipment, processes and facilities.
Control hazards and reduce risk to a tolerable level through mitigating and recovery measures.
Apply risk management tools to all proposed activities including acquisitions, bids and new business development.   

Planning:
HSE considerations shall be integral to all aspects of business planning or changes in the design, development, purchasing and delivery of our products and services.

Expectations
Identify and evaluate the consequences to health, safety and the environment when making changes to organizational structure, personnel, equipment, processes or procedures.
Assign responsibility for the achievement of HSE objectives in plans at all levels of the organization.
Determine the resources required to achieve the plan.
Identify the means by which the plan is to be achieved.
Set a time scale and develop milestones for implementation.
Develop contingency plans for emergencies and in cases when plans or objectives cannot be completely achieved.
Regularly review and follow up on progress towards achieving the HSE plans and objectives.   

Implementation, Recording and Monitoring:
Do what you said you would do. Determine and record whether those actions are effective. Activities shall be conducted in accordance with defined standards, and continuous improvement shall be promoted and monitored through active employee participation.
Expectations

Assign necessary resources and authority to groups or individuals to implement plans, processes, procedures and work instructions.
Hold personnel accountable for completing tasks according to plans and HSE performance standards.
Develop and use systematic monitoring systems for both proactive and reactive performance measures to measure and support HSE objectives.
Determine non-compliance and the opportunity for practicable improvement against performance measures.
Determine what records are needed to meet HSE policies, objectives, company standards, local laws or regulations and customer requirements. 
Create records that are clear, easily understood and unambiguous in the language applicable to Ensign. Store records for a time interval consistent with good practice and local regulations.
Collect and record information on incidents which actually, or have the potential to, affect health, safety and the environment. 
Evaluate incident information to determine the need for corrective action to prevent recurrence. Distribute lessons learned.   

Audit and Review (Assessment and Continuous Improvement):
Prove you did what you said you would do. Is the Management System achieving results and fulfilling policy intent? Audits and reviews shall be conducted to verify the implementation and effectiveness of the HSE Management System and its conformation to this specification.

Expectations
1, Set frequency and level for audits for each division or operation.
2, Document and distribute the audit report for corrective action and future reference. Review with all affected employees.
3, Monitor progress towards achieving and completing corrective actions at scheduled time intervals.
4, Schedule periodic management system reviews to include, but not be limited to:
    1, Audit finding summaries
    2, Analysis of incidents, regulatory citations and non-compliance to divisional standards
    3, Current and future requirements of customers and regulators
    4, Feedback from customers and regulators
    5, Feedback from employees
    6, Analysis of risk management processes
    7, Appropriateness of current systems to meet business needs
5, Create review team with the authority to change the system and update the system requirements.