
Key principles of machinery and equipment safety 
 

Mechanical hazards:

Machinery and equipment have moving parts. The action of moving parts may have sufficient force in motion to cause injury to people. 
 
When assessing machinery and equipment for possible mechanical hazards, consider:

Machinery and equipment with moving parts that can be reached by people

Machinery and equipment that can eject objects (parts, components, products or waste items) that may strike a person with sufficient force to cause harm

Machinery and equipment with moving parts that can reach people, such as booms or mechanical appendages (arms)

Mobile machinery and equipment, such as forklifts, pallet jacks, earthmoving equipment, operated in areas where people may gain access. 

 
Common mechanical hazards and associated risks for machinery and equipment are shown below.

 

Hazard                                                                       Risk 


Rotating shafts, pulleys, sprockets and gears                  Entanglement 
Hard surfaces moving together                                      Crushing 
Scissor or shear action                                                Severing 
Sharp edge – moving or stationary                          Cutting or puncturing 
Cable or hose connections                            Slips, trips and falls (e.g. oil leaks) 

​

https://static.wixstatic.com/media/8fafd4_6c883d2a153a485e9bf73d6b714dffb3~mv2.png/v1/fill/w_1200,h_680,al_c,q_90,usm_0.66_1.00_0.01,enc_auto/motor-drives.png


Robotic arms can reach over their base,

move with remarkable speed and high force,

and can cause injury if controls to separate

people from moving plant are not implemented.

Mobile plant operated in areas where people work

may cause injury through collision. Traffic control

and segregation are forms of control. 

https://static.wixstatic.com/media/8fafd4_8177224e300142878782cd83123fb3ad~mv2.jpg/v1/fill/w_696,h_516,al_c,lg_1,q_80,enc_auto/traffic-management-workplace-floor-marki.jpg


Non-mechanical hazards:

Non-mechanical hazards associated with machinery and equipment can include harmful emissions, contained fluids or gas under pressure, chemicals and chemical by-products, electricity and noise, all of which can cause serious injury if not adequately controlled. In some cases, people exposed to these hazards may not show signs of injury or illness for years. Where people are at risk of injury due to harmful emissions from machinery and equipment, the emissions should be controlled at their source. 
 
When assessing machinery and equipment for possible non-mechanical hazards, consider how machinery and equipment can affect the area (environment) around them. 
 
Common non-mechanical hazards are shown below.

 
           Non-mechanical                                                                    Hazards 
Dust                                                                                       Mist (vapours or fumes) 
Explosive or flammable atmospheres                                                        Noise 
Heat (radiated or conducted)                                                 Ignition sources (flame or spark) 
High intensity light (laser, ultraviolet)                                                 Molten materials 
Heavy metals (lead, cadmium, mercury)                                                Chemicals 
Steam                                                                                 Pressurised fluids and gases 
Ionising radiation (x-rays, microwaves)                                                   Electrical 
 
 
https://static.wixstatic.com/media/8fafd4_1837d9a59a5e4604b5d2aaf63b4cab9f~mv2.jpg/v1/fill/w_760,h_431,al_c,lg_1,q_80,enc_auto/no%20mechanical%20hazards.jpg


Access hazards:

People must be provided with safe access that is suitable for the work they perform in, on and around machinery and equipment. A stable work platform, suited to the nature of the work that allows for good posture relative to the work performed, sure footing, safe environment and fall prevention (if a fall may occur), is a basic requirement. For example, cooling towers on building roofs may have poor access, yet must be attended by a service person at predictable times for water treatment, chemical dosing or monitoring of automated dosing equipment. People performing these tasks must be provided with the means to get themselves and any equipment they require onto the roof with no risk, or minimal risk of fall or injury. 
 
When thinking about safe access to machinery and equipment, consider the following:

Who will be working on or around the machinery and equipment

People who are required to work in enclosed areas where the atmosphere could be harmful, such as pits, tanks or storage vessels

What equipment or materials need to be carried to undertake the task

Where and when is access required for operation, maintenance and cleaning

How will people gain safe access (walkway, gantry, elevated work platform or ladder)

What work will be carried out during access

Will people be near or exposed to an unidentified mechanical or non-mechanical hazard at the time of access

Has consultation occurred with workers or contractors regarding how they intend to gain access, and what equipment and work platform or structure is best suited for the intended task. 

 
Access:

Access needs can be predicted and planning must occur in advance. People need access to machinery and equipment in the workplace (either continually or occasionally) for predictable tasks such as operation, maintenance, repair, installation, service or cleaning. Access may vary during each stage of the machinery and equipment life cycle.

For example:

Installation or removal                                                                                                                                                                  1, Complete access from every area may be required and involve disconnection or connection of services, such as water, air, pipes, installation of electrical cable to switch board

Operation                                                                                                                                                                                  1, access for set up, operation and adjustment

Maintenance, repair, cleaning, alteration or adaptation                                                                                                                        1, access to remote areas may be required.  

 

Following are examples of common hazards by type of workplace activity. 
 
 
People who install or dismantle machinery and equipment could:

work in isolation

work on machinery and equipment at height, or over machinery and equipment to connect services, such as electricity, air or water

work in low light, or with bright directional light

access machinery and equipment from the top, sides or underneath

work with or near cranes, forklifts or rigging to lift machinery and equipment

work in confined spaces

use power tools, welders, extension leads, which present electrical hazards if damaged or wet. 

 
 
People operating machinery and equipment could:

be required to place their hands close to the mechanism of the machinery and equipment that does the work, and may be injured if caught or trapped by moving parts

be exposed to constant harmful noise, radiated energy or fumes being emitted from the machinery and equipment being operated, or are close to

inadvertently bump or knock poorly placed control levers or buttons

be required to make adjustments to the mechanism of machinery and equipment while the machine is in motion

be required to clear away scrap

make minor adjustments, or reach into the moving mechanism of the machinery and equipment being operated. 

 
 
People providing maintenance or repair services could:

work alone

work on machinery and equipment at height, or over machinery and equipment to connect services, such as electricity, air or water

access machinery and equipment from the rear or sides

be required to enter confined spaces of larger machinery and equipment

be trapped by the mechanism of the machinery and equipment through poor isolation of energy sources or stored energy, such as spring-loaded or counterbalance mechanisms, compressed air or fluids, or parts held in position by hydraulics or pneumatic (air) rams

move heavy parts when changing the set up of machinery and equipment, or repairing failed parts, such as electric motors or gearbox assemblies

disable or remove normal safety systems to access the mechanism of machinery and equipment.

 

People providing cleaning services could:

work alone

access machinery and equipment from the rear or sides, or in unexpected ways

climb on machinery and equipment

enter confined spaces, or larger machinery and equipment

become trapped by the mechanism of the machinery and equipment through poor isolation of energy sources or stored energy, such as spring-loaded or counterbalance mechanisms, compressed air or fluids, or parts held in position by hydraulics or pneumatic (air) rams

work with chemicals

operate electrical equipment in wet areas.   

​

Risk control of machinery and equipment hazards

 
Risk control of general hazards:

 

Where exposure to machinery and equipment hazards cannot be eliminated or substituted for machinery and equipment of improved design, risk controls must be applied to the hazards to prevent or reduce the risk (chance) of injury or harm. Workplace health and safety laws require the highest order control be applied. 
 
Higher order machinery and equipment risk controls are preventative by nature, are effective and durable for the environment it is used in, and deal directly with the hazard at its source. 
 
Lower order machinery and equipment risk controls, such as personal protective equipment (PPE), can prevent injuries, but are generally not as effective as higher order controls, as they rely more on worker behaviour, maintenance programs and supervision. 
 
Administrative controls use systems of work to reduce risk by providing a framework of expected behaviours. Examples are rotation of staff to reduce exposure to a hazard, or a documented safe system of work, such as ‘lockout tagout’. These types of controls rely on extensive instruction, information, training and supervision. In terms of time and ongoing administration by managers and employers to ensure the desired behaviour occurs, administrative controls can be the most expensive and least effective form of hazard control. 
 
Note: The use of PPE and administrative controls are low or last order controls used to deal with any residual risk associated with the hazard. As such, these last order controls can be used in support of higher order controls that deal with a hazard at its source and should not be considered as the sole means of control. These types of risk controls require constant monitoring and reinforcement. 
 
Effective machinery and equipment risk controls reflect some or all of the following characteristics:

the hazard is controlled at its source

contact or access to the hazard is prevented

sturdy construction (correct materials with few points of potential failure)

fail-safe (failure of the control system to be effective will result in machinery shut-down)

tamper-proof design (as difficult as possible to bypass)

presents minimum impediment to machinery and equipment operator

easy to inspect and maintain

 does not introduce further hazards through the risk control action.                                                                                                            

 
Risk control of mechanical hazards:

​

Separation is a simple and effective machinery and equipment risk control and may be achieved by distance, barrier or time.

Distance separation means a person cannot reach the hazard due to distance.

Barrier separation means an effective barrier or guard denies access and controls ejection of parts, products or waste.

Time separation means at the time of access, the machinery and/or equipment is disabled. 

 
Examples of separation include:

physical barriers and guards, such as fences, screens or fixed panels of various materials

various forms of guarding and interlocking (as described in AS4024, parts 1601 and 1602, Safety of Machinery)

making the hazard inaccessible by reach (where the distance between a person and the hazard forms an effective barrier). 

 
Note: When considering the suitability of distance guarding, consider the safe access requirements of maintenance people who gain access by ladder, scaffold or elevated work platform. 
 
Guarding:

​

A guard can perform several functions including:

denying bodily access

containing ejected parts, tools, off-cuts or swath

preventing emissions escaping

forming part of a safe working platform. 

 
Guarding is commonly used with machinery and equipment to prevent access to:

rotating end drums of belt conveyors

moving augers of auger conveyors

rotating shafts

moving parts that do not require regular adjustment

machine transmissions, such as pulley and belt drives, chain drives, exposed drive gears

any dangerous moving parts, machinery and equipment. 

 
Where access is not anticipated, a fixed guard can be permanently applied by a bonding agent, welding, or secured with one-way screws. If access is generally not required, a permanently fixed barrier is the preferred option.  

Where access to the hazard is infrequent, the installation of a fitted guard, that can be removed by use of a tool, may be an acceptable control, where the tool to remove the barrier or guard is not normally available to the operator. 
 
Adjustable guarding incorporates movable sections or panels of the guard and allows for material or parts to be fed into the guarded area while still preventing bodily contact. 

​

Tunnel guards provide a tunnel, aperture or chute in which material can be inserted into the machinery and equipment, but due to the restrictive design and depth of the opening, fingers, hands, arms, or the entire person is prevented from intruding into the danger area. 
 
Where frequent cleaning is required, the guard may be constructed of mesh that prevents intrusion of body parts, but allows for hosing. Food production workplaces, that use conveyors in areas where hygiene or food safety is an integral part of the operation, use fixed mesh guarding of conveyor end rollers. 
 
Interlock guarding occurs when the act of moving the guard (opening, sliding or removing) to allow access, stops the action of the hazardous mechanism. 

​

Interlock guarding works by:

disconnecting the drive mechanism mechanically (e.g. applying a brake or disengaging a clutch or geared mechanism)

isolating the power source of the drive mechanism (e.g. stopping the motor)

a combination of mechanical and power disconnection. 

 
Interlock guarding is generally achieved via mechanical or electrical means, but may also include hydraulic or pneumatic control systems. 
 
The energy stored in moving parts (momentum) can cause the mechanism of the machinery or equipment to run on for some time after the source of driving energy has been removed. 
 
For access panels or doors supporting an interlocking device allowing access to mechanical parts that move for periods after the energy source is removed, a separate mechanism to delay release of the retaining or locking mechanism may be incorporated. 
 
Captive key systems rely upon a single key that is shared between the control panel (‘on’ switch) and the access gate lock of the physical barrier to the danger area. Removal of the key from the control panel can only occur when the switch is in the ‘off’ position, and the gate will only release the key when in the locked position. 
 
Captive key systems do not provide full isolation of the power source, but may provide limited temporary access under controlled conditions. 
 
Administrative controls, such as effective supervision, instruction and training, are required to ensure that only one key is available for the system, and the key is not removed from the access gate or guard by a second operator while a person is exposed to the danger area of the plant. Operations such as maintenance, repair, installation service or cleaning may require all energy sources to be isolated and locked out to avoid accidental start-up. 

​

Other mechanical hazard risk control options

​

Simultaneous two-handed operation

Where a machine has only one operator, the use of simultaneous two-handed operation buttons can serve as a risk control. This ensures that operation of the hazardous mechanism cannot occur until both hands are clear of the danger area. 
 
The two buttons must be pushed at the same time and are located at a distance from each other that prevents simultaneous operation by one hand. 
 
The operation should be designed so that if either or both of the buttons are released, the hazardous action of the machinery and/or equipment cannot be reached, or if it can be reached, the mechanism returns to a safe state. 
 
Presence sensing systems

If physical guards cannot be used, then a presence sensing system can be used as a control to reduce risk. Presence sensing systems can be used where people enter areas shared by moving production equipment. 
 
Presence sensing systems are capable of providing a high degree of flexibility with regard to access. 
 
Presence sensing systems detect when a person is in the identified danger area, and stops or reduces the power or speed of the mechanism at the time of entry to provide for safe access. 
 
Presence sensing systems can rely on foot pressure pads, infra-red sensing, light beams or laser scanning. The most appropriate type of sensing device will depend on the operating environment and access requirements. 
 
AS4024.2 provides guidance on design specification, ratings on integrity and reaction times. Manufacturers’ specifications for installation and maintenance must also be observed. 
 
Specialist assistance may be required by experienced professionals to ensure the correct selection and installation of presence sensing systems. Companies who manufacture or supply these systems also provide technical support and installation assistance. 

​

Critical safety systems:

A critical safety system is a safety control system responsible for ensuring the safety of a person when approaching or accessing a hazard. 
 
Failure of the critical safety system will leave a person exposed to the hazard, and in danger. 
 
Critical safety systems may include barriers or guards fitted to prevent access, or integrated complex interlocking and presence sensing systems. Failure to replace guards, damaged perimeter fences that allow access, and bypassed or disabled interlocking systems, are examples of critical safety systems failures that require immediate attention to ensure the safety of people. 
 
High integrity/fail-safe control:

All safety control systems should be designed and built to prevent failure or, in the event of failure, deactivate the operation of the machinery and equipment. 
 

Many different types of machinery and equipment use high integrity safety systems that disable a mechanism at the time of access. Some examples include:

brake press

power press

robotic machine (automated machines)

injection moulders

powered guillotines

programmable lathe and milling equipment

industrial mixers

mincing equipment

plasma cutting tables

laser cutting tables. 


Redundant and self-monitoring fault detection systems Redundant or dual systems (doubling up) and self-monitoring fault detection systems are also effective methods to prevent failure of critical safety systems. 
 
Selection and installation of these types of complex interactive control measures may require expert or specialist assistance. 
 
The Australian Standards provide information on machinery and equipment safety systems and reflect the current state of knowledge and best practice. The AS4024 Safety of Machinery series of publications provides specific information for commonly used machine types in industry, such as woodworking or metalworking machinery.

 

Risk control of non-mechanical hazards:

The first step in selecting suitable and effective controls for non-mechanical hazards is to understand the nature of emissions that can be released by machinery and equipment in the workplace, where those emissions collect and the way they may cause harm.

1, Separating people from non-mechanical hazards is necessary where the emission cannot be controlled at the source through elimination or substitution. Hazardous machinery and equipment emission controls rely largely on isolating of people from the hazardous emission. Hoods, lids, covers or impervious guards (solid barriers that prevent escape of the emission) can serve to contain a number of different types of emissions within machinery and/or equipment. For potentially harmful substance exposures from machinery and equipment, such as mist, fumes, vapour or dust, and where it is not possible to control the emission at its source, ventilation and extraction systems are used to remove the hazardous emissions from the work environment.

2, Guarding may also serve to mute noise emissions through application of sound absorbing materials. Other emissions, such as lasers, ultraviolet light, bright light or welding flash, can also be safely screened to prevent potential harmful exposure.

3, Oil leaks from machinery and/or equipment may present a serious slip hazard. By preventing oil leaks through routine maintenance, or containing leaking oil with a drip tray or through spill containment strategies, the risk the hazard presents is controlled. 

Personal protective equipment:

Where it is not possible for emissions to be controlled at their source, or removed or reduced through effective ventilation, extraction or diversion, the use of personal protective equipment (PPE) as a final measure must be considered to ensure safety. 
 
PPE is a lower order control and can only be used where higher order controls are not possible or are not totally effective. 
 
Selection and use of PPE requires careful consideration, as there are many different types that reduce the risk of injury of contact or exposure to a hazard. 
 
Incorrect use of PPE, or purchasing inappropriate PPE, can contribute to serious workplace incidents. 
 
PPE that is uncomfortable, restrictive or heavy may create secondary hazards, and, as a result, constant supervision may be necessary to ensure it is used effectively. 
 
Risk control of access hazards:

Larger machinery and equipment may contain internal areas where a hazardous environment may occur by design, or as a result of the work being done. 
 
A confined space may exist where people require access to a mostly closed area that presents difficult or restricted path of access, where oxygen levels may be depleted or displaced, or where harmful levels of contaminate, such as gas, vapour or dust, exist. 
 
There are legal requirements that must be observed prior to allowing people to enter a confined space.

Training in confined space entry.

Issue of entry permits.

Continuous monitoring and supervision. 


Working at height Providing people with a suitable work platform for the task being undertaken reduces the risk of injury from falling from machinery and equipment. 
 
Often ‘safe access’ equipment, made available during installation of machinery and/or equipment, is removed after commissioning. Workplace managers may not have considered or recognised the need to provide similar means to gain safe access to parts of machinery and equipment at height, or in awkward locations for maintenance, repair, service or cleaning activities. 
 
Safe access at height can be broken into three categories. Each category has in common the need to provide a stable, safe platform suitable for the work to be undertaken, and to be equipped to support and retain a person within the confines of the platform. 
 
1. Fixed or permanently installed access platforms:

gantries

mezzanine floors

fixed platforms

stairways. 

 
2. Mobile elevated work platforms (EWPs):

scissor lifts

knuckle booms. 

  
Note: Safe work practices must take into account the risk of trapping an operator between the EWP and a fixed structure (e.g. overhead beams, electrical cables, pipes). 
 
3. Temporary platforms:

scaffolding

ladders. 

 

Where safe working platforms are used and the risk of a fall remains, travel restraint and fall-arrest harnesses can be used where a suitable point of attachment exists. Harness systems, anchor points and shock absorbing lanyards must be compatible at each point of attachment from the anchor point to the harness, with approved and rated latching devices to ensure the integrity of the system. 
 
When using fall-arrest systems, specialist assistance may be necessary to select appropriate equipment, provide effective training in use and inspection, and develop an emergency retrieval plan to recover a person suspended in a fall-arrest harness. People suspended by a fall-arrest harness for short periods of time may suffer serious health effects, or may have incurred injury during the fall prior to the fall-arrest device deploying. Emergency retrieval plans should allow for immediate local response in safely retrieving people to avoid fatalities. 
 
Note: The Work Health and Safety Regulation 2011 prescribes specific requirements that must be taken into account when determining risk controls for both confined spaces and working at heights. 
 
Lockout tagout:

Removing and controlling energy sources during access People performing tasks, such as maintenance, repair, installation, service and cleaning, are highly vulnerable, and have a higher risk of being killed or maimed through inadvertent operation of machinery and equipment they are working in, on or around. 
 
Accidental start-up, or movement of a machine mechanism, can occur:

if control levers or buttons are bumped or knocked

if a short circuit of the control system occurs

when hydraulic or air pressure is released

when undoing retaining bolts. 

 
It is essential that people who work in, on or around machinery and equipment are not exposed to hazards due to accidental start-up or movement of the machine mechanism. (AS4024.1603 Safety of Machinery). 
 

The following is an overview of the lockout tagout process:

shutdown the machinery and equipment

identify all energy sources and other hazards

identify all isolation points

isolate all energy sources

de-energise all stored energies

lockout all isolation points

tag machinery controls, energy sources and other hazards

test by ‘trying’ to reactivate the plant without exposing the tester or others to risk (failure to reactivate ensures that isolation procedures are effective and all stored energies have been dissipated). 


Identifying energy sources All energy sources likely to activate the machinery and equipment and expose people to hazards should be identified prior to work beginning. 
 
Such energy sources include:

electricity (mains)

battery or capacitor banks

fuels

heat

steam

fluids or gases under pressure (water, air steam or hydraulic oil)

stored energy

gravity

radiation. 

 
If original designer and installer ‘as built’ diagrams of machinery and equipment installations are not available, new diagrams and photographs showing location and details of various isolation points of machinery and equipment should be developed as part of the isolation procedures. Isolation points may include switches, valves, energy lines, pipes and power sources. 
 
These diagrams and photographs can then be used, along with written procedures, for information and training. 
 
De-energise stored energies:

 

Any or all of the following steps need to be taken to guard against energy left in the machinery and equipment after it has been isolated from its energy sources:

inspect the machinery and equipment to make sure all parts have stopped moving

install ground wires

release the tension on springs or block the movement of spring-loaded parts

block or brace parts that could fall

block parts in hydraulic and pneumatic systems that could move from pressure loss

bleed the lines and leave vent valves open

drain process piping systems and close valves to prevent the flow of hazardous material

if a line must be blocked where there is no valve, use a blank flange

purge reactor tanks and process lines

dissipate extreme cold or heat, or provide protective clothing

if stored energy can accumulate, it must be monitored to ensure it stays below hazardous levels. 

 
Isolation procedures Isolation procedures in each workplace vary in detail because of differences in machinery and equipment, power sources, hazards and processes. However, if adequate interlocking is not possible, or the maintenance, repair, installation, service or cleaning requires the method of guarding or interlocking to be bypassed or removed, an isolation procedure should be implemented. 

Note: Activating operational stop buttons, emergency stop devices or interlock devices is not equivalent to the isolation of power sources, or the release of stored energy. 
 
Lockout:

​

Isolation devices:

A wide range of devices is available for locking out energy sources and other hazards that could pose a risk to people working on machinery and equipment. 
 
These devices include switches with a built-in lock, and lockouts for circuit breakers, fuses and all types of valves. 
 
Also readily available are chains, safety lockout jaws (sometimes called hasps), which accommodate a number of padlocks, and sets of robust safety padlocks. 
 
Only devices that incorporate a lock or accommodate one or more padlocks are suitable lockout devices. 
 
One person – one lock:

If more than one person is working on the same item of machinery and equipment, each person should attach their own lock to prevent the isolator being opened while their specific task is in progress. 
 
The isolation procedure should identify common lockout points to ensure energy cannot be restored while someone is still working on the machinery and equipment. 
 
If two or more people are working on machinery and equipment that is isolated through several lockout points, each person should attach a lock and tag to each lockout point. 
 
To avoid the need for multiple locks on each lockout point, a lock box may be used. Under this system, each lockout point is locked by only one lock, and the keys to the locks of the machinery’s lockout points are placed inside a box that is locked by all the individual locks of people working on the same plant. 
 
One lock – one key:

Each person working on the machinery and equipment should have their own lock, key and tag. There should be no duplicate key available for any lock, except a master or duplicate key, for use in an emergency, that is secured and not readily available. 
 
During inspection, repair, maintenance, cleaning or adjustment of the machinery and equipment, the one key to each person’s lock should be held only by that person, who is responsible for both locking and unlocking the lockout device. 
 
Multiple energy sources:

If more than one energy source or hazard has to be locked out to enable safe shut-down of the machinery and equipment, the single key to each lockout device should be held by the same person. 
 
Tagout:

A tag on its own is not an effective isolation device. A tag acts only as a means of providing information to others at the workplace. A lock should be used as an isolation device, and can be accompanied by a tag. 
 
Purchasing machinery and equipment list:

The following list provides topics for consideration and consultation when purchasing machinery and equipment. It is important to also note that under Sections 22, 23, 24 and 25 of the Work Health and Safety Act 2011, designers, manufacturers, importers and suppliers of plant have specific duties. 
 
 People:

Who will come into contact with the machinery and equipment?

What are people required to do?

How will work be carried out and completed?

Based on the knowledge of existing machinery and equipment, what improvements should the purchaser specify when buying new machinery and equipment? 

 
Documentation and training: 

What supporting documentation will accompany the new machinery and equipment?

To what standards has the machinery and equipment been manufactured (Australian, European, Japanese, American)?

What support is offered by machinery and equipment suppliers (service, training, maintenance)?

What operating and maintenance information is supplied with the new machinery and equipment?

Is the supplied information sufficient to provide the basis of a workplace training package?

If the machinery and equipment is refurbished or second-hand, how do the risk controls compare with similar new machinery and equipment?

Have you allowed extra resources to upgrade existing risk controls to reflect current state of knowledge? 

 
 
Location: 

Where is the machinery and equipment to be located, and how much space does it require?

Is there enough room to access the machinery and equipment for servicing, maintenance, repair or cleaning?

Do people walk past or work in close proximity to the proposed machinery and equipment location?

Is there enough light?

Is there sufficient ventilation? 


Operations and maintenance: 

Will the machinery and equipment introduce more noise to the workplace?

Will the machinery and equipment perform a task other than what it was designed for?

What types of emissions does the machinery and equipment produce when operated or cleaned, such as noise, fumes, light and heat?

What are the expected hours of machinery and equipment operation?

How will the material arrive, and how is the product going to be removed after the process is complete?

Are there environmental factors, such as hazardous atmospheres of flammable vapours or dust or water, that may affect the machinery and equipment, the operators or maintenance?

Does the machinery and equipment have confined spaces?

Does the machinery and equipment have valves or isolation points located at height? 

 
 
Various: 

Will the machinery and equipment fit through the door?

Is the floor of the workplace strong enough to support the machinery and equipment?

Do you understand that if you purchase machinery and equipment outside Queensland, then you also take on the obligations of the importer?

Do you understand the obligations of an importer?

Do you understand that if you alter or adapt machinery and equipment to perform an alternate function, then you also take on the obligations of the designer for those alterations?

Do you understand the obligations of a designer?

If the machinery and equipment is mobile, where will it operate and who may be in the area?

In what terrain will the mobile machinery and equipment operate?  