
Metro Rail Safety:

In the construction phase:

10 Metro construction safety tips you need to know:-

Do not walk, run, ride or play in a construction area or around construction equipment, dirt piles   or work areas. 

Always walk on the sidewalk or designated walkway.

Watch for sidewalk closure signs and remain alert to posted notices of temporary walkways. 

To avoid distractions, do not use cell phones,   headphones, video games or other hand held devices   in construction zones. Staying alert to your   surroundings reduces the likelihood of an incident. 

Avoid going near a construction zone   whenever possible. Heavy machinery and   debris can be hazardous.

Stop, look and listen for construction vehicles like   bulldozers and dump trucks. Dust can impede   your vision.

See and be seen. Cross only at intersections and make eye contact with drivers of construction  vehicles. You are smaller than most ces of   equipment and they may not see you.

Slow down and follow signs that tell you where to walk, skateboard or bicycle.

Be aware of your surroundings and falling objects in construction zones, even if they are not directly  overhead. Wind can blow them in your direction. 

Obey construction signage and any instructions by those working on the project.

Stay outside orange cones, construction fences and chain link fences.

​

Metro Construction Safety Signs:

​

 1, KEEP OUT!  CONSTRUCTION ZONE Do not enter the construction zone
 2, DO NOT ENTER Authorized vehicles only
 3, WORKERS AHEAD Watch for construction workers
 4, CONCRETE BARRIER Do not cross concrete barrier
 5, OPEN TRENCH Steer clear of the ditch
 6, DETOUR Road is closed ahead – follow signs for  alternate route
 7, FLAGGER AHEAD Be ready to slow down or stop
 8, STOP/DO NOT ENTER Do not enter area
 9, ARROW PANEL Follow the direction of the arrows
 10, ORANGE CONES Stay outside the  orange cones
 11, SIDEWALK CLOSED –  CROSS HERE Cross to the other side of the street

 

General Safety 
 
Safety is Paramount and always top priority. Safety takes precedence over deadlines, production schedules, and all other considerations. When uncertainty arises, take the safest course.  Remember that accidents are a result of carelessness, unsafe practices, and lack of attention or complacency.  All accidents can be avoided. 
 
Please be aware of the following rules at all times: 
 

Using, possessing, or working under the influence of alcohol and /or drugs is not permitted anywhere on railroad property.  This includes prescription drugs that cause drowsiness or otherwise impair one’s ability to perform their assigned task. 

The use or possession of unauthorized radio equipment is forbidden.  Use of personal radios (i.e. IPods’, MP3 players), and cell phone ear pieces while working is prohibited. 

When using cellular phones you must remain at least 25-feet from the nearest rail.  

Horseplay, physical altercations, running or jumping is forbidden. 

Firearms or other deadly weapons, including knives with a blade in excess of three (3) inches are prohibited on SCRRA property. 

Work on public streets, roadway crossings, and highway bridges should be performed with due regard for the convenience and safety of the public. 

Only authorized employees are allowed on engines, cars, cabooses, track cars or other railroad equipment.  

 

Right of Way Safety 
 
When on or near the tracks, the following precautions must be taken: 
 

Keep clear of all tracks unless the client indicates that they are protected. No work must begin until the client is present at work site and a job briefing has been conducted. 

Always look both ways before crossing tracks.  

Always expect a train on any track at any time. Expect movement of locomotives, railroad cars or on-track equipment in either direction at any time. (Remember, there could be an uncontrolled movement.) 

Always step over the rails when crossing the tracks. Never walk, stand, or sit on the rails.  The rail surface can be extremely slippery.  

Always face the direction from which the train or on-track equipment is approaching. 

Avoid track switches.  The switch points can move unexpectedly and with enough force to crush ballast rock!  Stand 150 feet from track switches when trains are approaching. Stay away from any other railroad device of which you are not familiar. 

Always walk single file when crossing the tracks in a group.  

Never stand between adjacent tracks in multiple track territory when a train is passing. 

Always cross at least 20 feet away from the end of equipment: i.e. engines, railroad cars, or on-track equipment  

Do not pass between standing locomotives, railroad cars or on- track equipment when there is less than 50 feet between the equipment. 

Never cross tracks by going underneath, over or through cars, engines or on-track equipment. 

Work is not allowed within 50 feet of the track centerline while trains are passing the work site.  Always stand as far back as possible to prevent injury from flying debris or loose rigging.  

Always visually inspect all passing trains.  If you detect a dangerous condition, inform your EIC or watchman immediately.  The EIC or watchman will notify the train crew. 

Always stop equipment while a train is passing through your working limits. No movement will be allowed toward an approaching train that would cause the engineer to believe the track might be fouled. 

Trains travel faster than they appear and are relatively quiet. Trains may operate with cab car forward.  You should not rely on past experiences to determine train schedule.  Train schedules are unpredictable and are subject to changes and/or delays.  

 

Housekeeping  
 
The following housekeeping rules apply to everyone. 
 
 1. The client will observe construction and material storage activities and may direct contractor employee(s) to correct conditions not in compliance with              the General Orders. 
 2. Material must not be stored closer than 20 feet of the closest rail. 
 3. Contractor employee(s) must cover areas with spilled oil or grease by applying sand or an equivalent approved material to minimize slipping hazards. 
 4. Contractor employees are responsible for the removal of all unused materials and debris created by the construction project.   
 5. Clear site immediately of all tripping hazards such as wire, loose material, etc. 
 6. Flammable materials, petroleum products, paints, caustics, acids and solvents must be stored in designated areas and in containers which are provided         for them.

 7.Contractor is responsible for restoring the property to its previous condition or better. This includes making repairs to drainage facilities, fences, gates, or          buildings damaged or removed by the Contractor or its forces. 

​

Electrical 
 
It is the responsibility of every employee to exercise care to avoid injury to themselves or to others. The following rules are for the safety of everyone: 
 
 1. Electric wires must be considered live at all times.  Employees shall not depend on the insulation of wires for their safety.  Employees avoid all overhead         and underground wires they may come in contact with. 
 2. When using temporary power cords, cords must never be placed over the rails. The EIC will work with the contractor for proper placement.  
 3. Employees must not place any metal objects across rails. 
 4. Signal cables/conduits may be encountered while excavating along the right-of-way.  

 

Emergency Situations 
 
Prior to starting work, the client will have these emergency phone numbers available on site; Ambulance, its operating contractor’s representative, Metrolink Operation Center (MOC) Signals emergency number and the police.  In emergency situations the following apply: 
 

When an injury occurs stop working and ensure everything possible is done for the injured person.  

If equipment was involved in the injury, it must be examined to ensure the equipment was in proper working condition.  Any defective tools, machinery and equipment are prohibited from use on property.

Immediately report to the client any accidents; personal injuries; defects in tracks, bridges, signals utilities or communication facilities; or, any unusual        condition that may affect the safe operation of the railroad.

Contractor employees must exercise care to prevent injury to themselves or others.Employees must be alert and attentive at all times when performing their  work. 

In case of personal injury, loss of life, or damage to property, the client must immediately document the names, addresses and occupation of all persons involved, including all persons at the scene regardless of whether these persons give a statement about the incident.  This information should be included in     the incident reports.

If an incident causes personal injury or death, all tools, machinery and other equipment involved, including premises where such accident occurred must be promptly inspected by the client and the supervising officer of person making the inspection.  or Watchman, Safety Officer, or other competent inspector has completed an inspection.  A report of such inspection, stating the conditions found and names of persons making the inspection must be promptly forwarded to company.  Tools, equipment and machinery must be secured until client

Information concerning incidents or personal injuries occurring to persons who are not employees, must not be given to anyone except authorized            representatives of the company or an officer of the law.   

​

Heavy Equipment 
 
When working on or around heavy equipment the following precautions must be taken: 
 
  1. Equipment operators must be properly trained and qualified before operating equipment on SCRRA right-of-way, and must operate equipment in a safe,          skillful and reliable manner. 
  2. Operators are responsible for verifying their machines are in safe, operating condition before starting and must assure that proper protection is being             afforded their operations.   The appropriate equipment must be used and operated for each task according the manufacturer’s instructions. 
  3. Never engage in the reckless operations of vehicles on the SCRRA right-of-way.  The speed limit on the right-of-way is not more than 15 mph and may            be lowered if conditions warrant.  Offenders may be asked to leave the SCRRA right-of-way by any SCRRA employee or representative observing unsafe        behavior.  
  4. Audible backup warning devices are required on all heavy equipment, at all times.  
  5. Operator must have the equipment manual on their machine. 
  6. While trains, engines or on-track equipment pass, operators must ensure that: 

​

Machines are stopped

Vehicles are stopped

Brakes are set

Buckets and shovels or clams are lowered to rest position and machine without buckets must have their load line tightened to prevent movement 

 
  7. Unauthorized persons cannot be carried on equipment. Persons qualified to be on equipment must be properly positioned before movement is  made.            Never transport passengers in truck beds or on heavy equipment. 
  8. Never allow employees in or on loaders and backhoe buckets. 
  9. Operators of equipment must be aware of the locations of overhead and underground utilities.  Operator must have a clear understanding of how to              protect utility lines before operating machinery. 
 10. NEVER move equipment across the tracks except at established road crossings.  Tracked or rubber  tire equipment will require the supervision of an               client any time railroad tracks are crossed. 
 11. NEVER move tracked or rubber tire equipment across railroad bridges or through tunnels.

 12. When heavy equipment is left unattended: 
 

Motor must be stopped and ignition must be locked

Parking or hand brake must be securely set

Keys must be in possession of operator or authorized employee, not left on the vehicle

Wheels must be securely blocked on grades

Equipment must be secured in a highly visible area 

 

Railroad Flagging/Protection:

​

The third party contractor’s foreman working on the right of way is responsible for the safety of their crews and must guard their crews against impending danger or injury. They shall bear in mind that safety is the first and most important consideration.   
 
No work can begin until an SCRRA representative is on site and proper protection is being afforded. 
 
The third party contractor must request and arrange for flagging services a minimum of five (5) working days before the work begins.     An SCRRA EIC or Watchman is required for your protection any time you are on SCRRA property (except for utility workers providing short term routine maintenance). 
On-track protection must be provided by an client.

 

when the following work is being performed, but not limited to: 
 

When any part of equipment is standing or being operated within 20 feet of the nearest track or has the potential to foul the track. 

When any construction activities are in progress within 20 feet of the nearest track, regardless of elevation above or below track. 

For any excavation in or around the tracks that may subject the tracks or other property to settlement or movement. 

Any clearing, grubbing, or demolition in proximity to the client, may endanger the property or operation.  property which, in the opinion of client

For any street construction and maintenance activities requiring temporary work area traffic control.  All activities that change the flow of traffic across a railroad crossing, (i.e. traffic cones, lane closures, etc.), must be protected: client engineering department must approve traffic control plans before work can begin. 

 
Good communication between the contractor and the EIC is imperative!  The EIC is responsible for verifying all workers and/or equipment near or on the main track have moved at least 20 feet from the nearest rail before allowing a train to pass the work site. 

 

Two Methods of On-Track Safety (OTS) 
 
Keeping Us Away From Trains- This method does not physically separate the operation of trains and equipment from the third party contractor employee. Clearing the track before the arrival of the train protects the third party contractor employee. 
 
TAW -Train Approach Warning

Employs a Watchman to visually identify a train or ontrack equipment and provide warning to a work group in time to occupy a place of safety 20 seconds prior to train arrival. 

​

Keeping Trains Away From Us- This method of OTS physically separates the operation of trains from the activities of the third party contractor employee.  
 

Working limits are used to keep trains away from work groups.  

Working limits are established to afford third party contractor employee the separation.  

Working limits are a segment of track with definite boundaries upon which trains or equipment move only authorized by the client.

Only a qualified client may establish or have control over working limits for the purpose of establishing OTS  designated by company

 
Railroad Terms:  
 
Ballast: – The rock that supports the track and ties.  This rock is groomed to keep the track in place, drain water away from the track, and to distribute the weight of trains to surrounding soil.  DO NOT DISTURB or place soil, sand, or debris on it. 
 
Centerline of Track: – An imaginary line, that runs down the center of the two rails of a track.  
 
Confined Space: – A space that is large enough and so configured that an individual can enter and perform assigned work.  The space has limited or restricted means for entry or exit and is not designed for continuous individual occupancy.  This would include but not limited to tanks, vessels, silos, storage bins, hoppers, vaults and pits. 
 
Derailment: - A potentially dangerous condition, whereby rail cars or engines leave the tracks. 
 
Employee-In-Charge (EIC): – A roadway worker designated to provide On-Track-Protection for one or more work groups. 

​

Engine: – A unit propelled by any form of energy or more than one of these units operated from a single control typically referred to as a locomotive. 
 
Excavation: – Any removal of earth.  Any excavation and/or shoring, no matter how large or small require prior approval from company Engineer. 
 
Exclusive Track:- Is a method of establishing working limits on controlled track in which movement, occupancy, or authority of trains and other equipment is withheld by control operator or restricted by flagman. 
 
Fill: – A section of earth built up to support the railroad track structure. 
 
Foul the ballast: – Anything that contaminates the ballast section of the roadbed and inhibits the ballast from supporting the track, draining water, or suppressing weed growth.  In most cases ballast is fouled by excavated material being placed on the ballast. 
 
Foul the track: – Placement of an individual or a piece of equipment in such a proximity to a track that the individual or equipment could be struck by a moving train or track equipment. SCRRA fouling distance is defined as within 20 feet from the nearest rail. 
 
Form B:- A method of exclusive track occupancy by authorizing a roadway worker to foul or occupy track(s) within limits between two recognizable points as determined by railroad timetable within a designated time period using flag protection.  

​

General Code of Operating Rules (GCOR): – The rules that govern the use of railroad tracks by trains, maintenance employees, contractors and others.  
 
Hy-rail Vehicle: - This vehicle is considered on-track equipment.  It is typically driven on highways, but has specially manufactured attachments that allow the vehicle to travel on railroad tracks.  They are viewed as trains and only authorized railroad personnel may operate them. 
 
Job Site: – Any area where work is performed, where materials and equipment are stored, or which employees access during the project. 
 
Main Track: – A track extending through yards and between stations that must not be occupied without authority or protection. 
 
 Mileposts: – Field indicators of approximate distance from a specific point the railroad system used for  approximate locations of railroad facilities.  They are not to be used for field surveys.  
 
On-Track Equipment: - Maintenance of Way machines such as track cars, Hy-rail vehicles, tampers, ballast regulators, etc. which may be operated on the track. 
 
On-Track Safety:- On track Safety is a state of freedom from the danger of being struck by moving trains or on track equipment that is provided by the operating and safety rules, which govern track occupancy by personnel, trains and on track equipment. 
 
Right to challenge:- If the third party contractor employee does not believe that the protection against trains is sufficient, the employee may at any time, in good faith, challenge the EIC’s form of protection and must remain clear of all tracks until the challenge is resolved. 
 
Roadbed:- A graded area beneath and on either side of the track structure that provides support and drainage of the track. 
 
Safety Training:- A session conducted by a qualified SCRRA representative at which On-Track Safety and Metrolink right of way rules and regulations are discussed. 
 
Safety Sticker: -  An emblem indicating completion of third party contractor training.  The non transferable “Safety Trained’ emblem is to be placed on each individual’s hard hat so it is visible when working on the Railroad Right-of Way. 
 
Siding: – A secondary track used for the passing of trains on single-track routes.  
 
Third Party Contractor: –Any contractor working on or adjacent to the railroad right of way on non railroad related work.

​

Tracks: – The rails, ties, and ballast that compose the traveling surface by trains. 
 
Track Structure: – The rails, ties ballast, and roadbed that compose the traveling surface used by trains. 
 
Track and Time:- The dispatcher will authorize men or equipment to occupy a track or tracks within specified limits for a certain time period. 
 
Trains: – One or more engines coupled together, with or without cars, which use the Railroad track. 
 
Train Approach Warning (provided by Watchmen):-A method of establishing On-Track Safety, provided by Watchmen, of warning workers of the approach of trains  in ample time (not less than 20 seconds) for them to move to or remain in a place of safety. 
 
Train Movement: – Any motion of engines and/or cars over the railroad tracks. 
 
Watchman:- An employee who has been annually trained and qualified to provide warning to roadway workers of approaching trains and on track equipment. 
 
Watchman Protection: – Employees in a work group using Train Approach Warning provided by watchmen lookouts must be provided warning in sufficient time to enable each employee to move to a previously determined place of safety, not less than 20 seconds before a train moving at the maximum speed authorized on that track would arrive at the employee’s location. 

​

Working Limits: – A segment of track with definite boundaries upon which trains and engines may move only as authorized by the roadway worker having control over that defined segment of track. Working limits may be established through exclusive track occupancy, foul time or inaccessible track. 
 
Yard:- A collection of secondary tracks used to store equipment (cars, engines, maintenance machines, etc.), for assembling or disassembling trains, and/or conducting other railroad operations.

​

Zero Tolerance Safety Rules :
 
Company has a Zero Tolerance policy. Zero tolerance means that certain actions will absolutely not be tolerated under any circumstances. Be aware of the following rules at all time: 
 

All third party contractors must have a Right-of Entry or approved document to work on company right-of-way. 

Drinking alcoholic beverages, being under the influence of any drug or medication or having them in your possession at any time on SCRRA property will not be tolerated. 

 All third party contractor personnel must have completed the Third Party Construction and Utility Worker Safety Training Program and have a valid company safety sticker on their hard hat or they will not be allowed on company property.  

All third party contractor personnel and utility workers must wear a hard hat, safety glasses with side shield, safety vest with retro-reflective tape for night work or at railroad crossing must be worn.  A safety T-shirt, sweatshirt or jacket may be worn during the day, long pants, and safety boots.

 

Working on or around tracks: Contractors must be aware of the following: 
 
 1. All work within 20 feet of the nearest rail must be coordinated with the Right-of-Way Encroachment Administrator so that protection can be provided for           personnel.  
 2. No work can begin until an SCRRA representative is on site and proper protection is being afforded. 
 3. Do not foul the track with any piece of equipment without an EIC, job briefing and exclusive track occupancy. 
 4. Do not stand on the track or within 20 feet of the nearest rail.  
 5. Do not leave open holes or trenches unattended. 
 6. Do not disturb or foul the ballast at any time. 
 
VIOLATION OF ANY OF THESE RULES WILL RESULT IN REMOVAL FROM THE PROPERTY AND MAY CAUSE THE RIGHT OF WAY ENTRY PERMIT TO BE REVOKED. 

​

Metro in the Working Stage:

​

Metro is committed to safety. It’s a top priority in everything we do. But to keep Metro as safe as possible, we need your help. This brochure tells you what you should know about safe Metrorail travel. Read it. Share it with your children. And have a safe ride on Metrorail.

 

On escalators:

Metrorail safety begins the minute you reach a station’s escalator. If you’re not careful, escalators can truly be dangerous. Most accidents result from slips, trips and falls when someone is in a rush. Here are some smart rules to follow:

 

Step carefully over the yellow comb plate (the point where the steps and platform meet).

Hold the handrail and face forward.

Keep clothing and shoes away from the sides where they might be caught.

Make sure shoelaces are tied and loose clothing doesn’t touch the escalator.

If you need to stop an escalator, look for the emergency stop buttons near the handrail or the floor at the top and bottom of the escalator.

If you’re with children, hold their hand.

If you’re carrying large packages, or have a stroller or bike, take the elevator.

Don’t sit on the steps.      

​

At the platform:

Stand near the center of the platform. That way, you won’t have to rush when the train arrives. Watch for the flashing floor lights near the edge; they tell you when a train is coming. If you see an unusual, unsafe or emergency situation at the platform, please report it to the station manager via the intercom mounted on the designated pylons.
 

On the tracks:

Falls from the platform to the trackbed are rare, but if you find yourself there, don’t panic and remember these lifesaving rules:

If you fall when a train is entering the station, roll beneath the platform edge away from the train and power rail. There is a safety area underneath the platform edge where you will be safe.

Call out for help but do not touch any part of the train or the track.

Stay there until help arrives. Wait for instructions from a Metro employee. Do not try to climb onto the platform without assistance from a Metro employee.

​

Boarding the train: 

Stand on the red tile (behind the bumpy tile) until the train stops.

Allow people to get off the train before you get on the train.

Never run to the train. Be especially careful when it’s rained or snowed; wet tile floors can be slippery.

Step carefully over the gap between the platform and train.

Don’t try to board after you hear the chimes or an announcement that the doors are closing.

Train doors don’t reopen automatically like elevator doors. Never try to hold the doors open. Keep yourself and personal items clear of the closing doors.

​

On train cars:

Here’s what you can do to be safe:

If you are standing, hold onto the seat-mounted or overhead handrails.

Never lean against the doors.

Never open the emergency doors and walk between the cars unless directed to by the train operator or Metro police officer during an emergency.

​

Anywhere in the system:

If you see a suspicious package, stay away from it. Report it to a train operator, Metro police officer, station manager or other Metro employee.

 

In case of emergency:

You should be aware of the many safety features on a Metro train should an emergency situation arise. These safety features include:

 

Intercoms:

To report an unusual situation to the train operator, use the intercom at either end of the car.

Push and hold the red button and speak into the intercom. To hear responses from the train operator, release the red button.

Report the rail car number that’s on the front of the intercom. Describe the problem clearly and briefly.

Wait for instructions from the train operator.  

​

Fire Extinguishers:

All rail cars are equipped with a fire extinguisher in the operator’s cab. Some cars have another extinguisher beneath the last left-hand seat at the opposite end of the car.

 

Emergency doors:

In most cases, evacuation of a train should be performed under the supervision of the train operator or other Metro employee. Before attempting to open doors, contact the train operator on the intercom at either end of the car and wait for the train to come to a stop. If the situation is life-threatening and an immediate evacuation is needed, take these steps.
 1. Inside tunnels: Use the emergency door release on the side of the tunnel with lights. Ground level: Face the front of the train and use the emergency door release on         the right hand side of the train. Elevated track: Look for the raised walkway; use the emergency door release on that side of the train.

 2. Lift the emergency door release cover and pull the red handle down.

 3. Slide the left door panel open and step down carefully.

 4. Once clear of the train, walk down the raised safety walk to the nearest station.

 5. If you encounter movable rails, walk on opposite side of high voltage rail (identified by white cover board) until you are clear of them. Do not touch the high voltage       rail.