
What is Personal Protective Equipment?

Personal protective equipment, or PPE, includes a variety of devices and garments to protect workers from injuries.


PPE includes:

Goggles.

Face Shields.

Safety Glasses.

Hard Hat.

Safety Shoes.

Gloves.

Safety Belt, Harness.

Earplugs and Earmuffs.

Respirators.

Aprons,

Body Protection. 

 
PPE should be used in conjunction with permanent protective measures, such as engineered guards, substitution of less hazards chemicals, and prudent work practices.

 

Identifying Potential Hazards in the Workplace: (Hazard Assessment)

OSHA requires that employers should identify and assess the risks to health and safety present in the workplace, so enabling the most appropriate means of reducing those risks to an acceptable level to be determined.

 
Training:

Prior to conducting work requiring the use of personal protective equipment, employees must be trained to know:

When PPE is necessary;

What type is necessary;

How it is to be worn;

What its limitations are;

Proper care, maintenance, useful life, and disposal. 

 
Employers should provide appropriate PPE and training in its use to its employees. No charge can be made to employee for the provision of PPE which is used only at work. 
 
Selection, Use and Maintenance of PPE: 
 
A- Head Protection:

Prevention of head injuries is an important factor in every safety program. Head injuries are caused by falling or flying objects, or by bumping the head against a fixed object. Head protection, in the form of protective hats, must do two things:

Resist penetration;

Absorb the shock of the blow.

This is accomplished by making the shell of the hat of a material hard enough to resist the blow, and by utilizing a shock-absorbing lining composed of headband and crown straps to keep the shell away from the wearer’s skull. 

 

Selection: Each type and class of head protector is intended to provide protection against specific hazardous conditions. An understanding of these conditions will help in selecting the right hat for the particular situation. 
 
Protective hats are made in the following types and classes: 
 
Type 1: Helmets with full brim, not less than 1 and ¼ inches wide.

​

Type 2: Brimless helmets with a peak extending forward from the crown.

​

For industrial purposes, three classes of helmets are recognized:

Class A: These helmets are for general service. They provide good impact protection but limited voltage protection. They are used mainly in mining, building construction, shipbuilding, and manufacturing.  
Class B: Choose Class B helmets if your employees are engaged in electrical works  They protect against falling objects and high-voltage shock and burns. (They are used extensively by electrical workers. 
Class C: Designed for comfort, these light weight helmets offer limited protection. They protect workers from bumping against fixed objects but do not protect against falling objects or electric shock. (This class is usually manufactured from aluminum and offers no dielectric protection).

​

B: Eye and Face Protection:

Suitable eye protectors must be provided where there is a potential for injury to the eyes for face from flying particles, molten metal, liquid chemicals, acids or caustic liquids, chemical gases or vapors, potentially injurious light radiation or a combination of these.
 

Protectors must meet the following minimum requirements:

1. Provide adequate protection against the particular hazards for which they are designed.

2. Be reasonably comfortable when worn under the designated conditions.

3. Fit snugly without interfering with the movements or vision of the wearer.

4. Be durable.

5. Be capable of being disinfected.

6. be easily cleanable and kept clean and in good repair. 
 
Types of Eye and Face Protection:

Safety Glasses

Safety Goggles

Face Shields

Welding Goggles

Laser Safety Glasses 

 

Selection:

Each eye, face, or face-and-eye protector is designed for a particular hazard. In selecting the protector, consideration should be given to the kind and degree of hazard, and protector should be selected on that basis. 

​

C:Foot Protection:

Statistics showed that most of the workers in selected occupations who suffered foot injuries were not wearing protective foot-ware.  
 
For protection of feet and legs from falling or rolling objects, sharp objects, molten metal, hot surfaces, and wet slippery surfaces, workers should use appropriate foot guards, safety shoes, or boots. Safety shoes should be sturdy and have an anti-resistant toe. In some shoes, metal insoles protect against puncture wounds. 

​

D-Hand Protection:

Employees are required to use appropriate hand protection when their hands are exposed to hazards such as: 

Absorption of harmful substances.

Severe cuts or lacerations.

Severe abrasions.

Punctures.

Chemical burns.

Thermal burns.

Harmful temperature extremes (cold/heat). 

 
Kinds of Protective Gloves: Gloves made from a wide variety of materials are designed for virtually every workplace hazard. They may be divided into four groups: 
 
1. Durable work gloves made of metal mesh, leather, or canvas.

2. Fabric and coated fabric gloves.

3. Chemical and liquid resistant gloves.

4. Insulating rubber gloves. 
 
1- Metal Mesh, Leather, or Canvas Gloves:

Sturdy gloves made from metal mesh, leather, or canvas provide protection against cuts, burns, and sustained heat.

Leather gloves. Leather gloves protect against sparks, moderate heat, blows, chips, and rough objects. Welders in particular need the durability of higher quality leather gloves.

Aluminized gloves. These gloves usually are used for welding, furnace, and foundry work because they provide reflective and insulating protection against heat. Aluminized gloves require an insert made of synthetic materials that protect against heat and cold.

Aramid fiber gloves. Aramid is a synthetic material that protects against heat and cold. Many glove manufacturers use aramid fiber to make gloves that are cut-and abrasive-resistant and wear well.

Other synthetic materials. Several manufacturers make gloves with other synthetic fabrics that offer protection against heat and cold. 

 

2- Fabric and Coated Fabric Gloves:

These gloves are made of cotton or other fabric to provide varying degrees of protection.

Fabric gloves. These gloves can protect against dirt, slivers, chafing, and abrasion. These gloves do not provide sufficient protection, however, to be used with rough, sharp, or heavy materials.

Coated fabric gloves. Manufacturers normally make these gloves from cotton flannel with napping on one side. By coating the un napped side with plastic, fabric gloves are transformed into general-purpose hand protection offering slip-resistant qualities. These gloves are used for tasks ranging from handling bricks and wire rope to handling chemical containers in laboratory operations. 


3- Chemical-and Liquid-Resistant Gloves:

Gloves made of rubber (latex, nitrile, or butyl), plastic, or synthetic rubber-like material such as neoprene protect workers from burns, irritation, and dermatitis caused by contact with oils, greases, solvents, and other chemicals. The use of rubber gloves also reduces the risk of exposure to blood and other potentially infectious substances. Some common gloves used for chemical protection are described below. (In addition table 4 rates various gloves as protectors against specific chemicals.) 
 

Butyl rubber gloves. These gloves protect against nitric acid, sulfuric acid, hydrofluoric acid, red fuming nitric acid, and peroxides. Highly impermeable to gases, chemicals, and water vapor, butyl rubber gloves also resist oxidation and ozone corrosion. In addition they resist abrasion and remain flexible at low temperature.

Natural latex or rubber gloves. In addition to resisting abrasions caused by sandblasting, grinding, and polishing, these gloves protect workers hands from most water solutions of acids, alkalis, salts, and ketones.

Neoprene Gloves. These glove have good pliability, finger dexterity, high density, and tear resistance which protect against hydraulic fluids, gasoline, alcohols, organic acids, and alkalis.

Nitrile rubber gloves. These sturdy gloves provide protection from chlorinated solvents such as trichloroethylene and perchloroethylene. In addition nitrile gloves resist abrasions, punctures, snags, and tears. 

 
4- Insulated Rubber Gloves:

These gloves provide protection against electricity. 

E- Respiratory Protection: 


Respiratory protective devices fall into three classes:

1. Air Purifying Devices

2. Air Supplying Devices

3. Combination air-purifying and air-supplying devices. 
 
1- Air Purifying Devices: The air-purifying devices cleans the contaminated atmosphere. Chemicals can be used to remove specific gases and vapors and mechanical filters can remove particulate matters. This type of respirator is limited in its use to those environments where the air contaminant level is within the specified concentration limitation of the device. These devices do not protect against oxygen deficiency (percentage of oxygen by volume is less than 19.5 percent oxygen).

​

The various types of air-purifying devices include: :

1, Mechanical-filter cartridge :

2, Chemical-cartridge :

3, Combination mechanical-filter/chemical-cartridge :

4, Gas Masks :

5, Powered Air-Purifying Respirators (PAPR) 
 
Mechanical-filter respirators:

Offer protection against airborne particulate matter, including dusts, mists, metal fumes, and smoke, but do not provide protection against gases or vapors. 
Chemical-cartridge respirators:

Afford protection against low concentrations of certain gases and vapors by using various chemical filters to purify the inhaled air. They differ from mechanical-filter respirators in that they use cartridge chemicals to remove harmful gases and vapors. 
Combination mechanical-filter/chemical-cartridge:

Use dust, mist, or fume filters with a chemical cartridge for dual multiple exposures. 
 
Gas masks:

Afford respiratory protection against certain gases, vapors, and particulate matters. Gas masks are designed solely to remove specific contaminants from the air, therefore, it is essential that their use be restricted to atmospheres which contain sufficient oxygen to support life. Gas masks may be used for escape only from atmospheres that are immediately dangerous to life or health (IDLH), but never for entry into such environments. Canisters for gas masks are color-coded according to the contaminant against which they provide protection. 
Powered air-purifying respirators (PAPR):

Protect against particulates, gases and vapors, or particulates and gases and vapors. The air-purifying element may be a filter, chemical cartridge, combination filter and chemical cartridge, or canister. The powered air-purifying respirator uses a power source (usually a battery pack) to operate a blower that passes air across the air-cleaning elements to supply purified air to the respirator. The great advantage of the powered air-purifying respirator is that it usually supplies air at positive pressure (relative to atmospheric).  
2- Air-supplying Devices:

Air-supplying devices are the class of respirators that provide a respirable atmosphere to the wearer, independent of the ambient air. Air-supplying respirators fall into three groups: : Supplied-air respirators : Self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) : Combination-SCBA and supplied-air respirators. 
Supplied-air respirators:

Deliver breathing air through a supply hose connected to the wearer’s face piece or enclosure. The air delivered must be free of contaminants and must be from source located in clean air. Supplied-air respirators should only be used in non-IDLH atmospheres. 
Self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA):

Provide complete respiratory protection against toxic gases and an oxygen deficiency. The wearer is independent of the surrounding atmosphere because he or she is breathing with a system that is portable and admits no outside air.

3- Combination air-purifying and air-supplying devices:

It is a device that is a combination of an air-line respirator with an auxiliary air-purifying attachment, which protection in the event the air supply fails. 

​

Proper Selection: Respirators shall be selected on the basis of hazards to which the worker is exposed. In selecting the correct respirator for a given circumstance, many factors must be taken into consideration: 
 
1, The nature of the hazard

2, Location of the hazardous area

3, Employee’s health

4, Work activity

5, Respirator characteristics, capabilities, and limitations. 
 
In order to make subsequent decisions, the nature of the hazard must be identified to ensure that an overexposure does not occur. One very important factor to consider is oxygen deficiency. Air-purifying respirators can be used only at atmospheres containing greater than 19.5 percent oxygen. 
 
Training and Fitting:

The user must be instructed and trained in the selection, use and maintenance of respirators. Every respirator user shall receive fitting instructions including demonstrations and practice in how the respirator should be worn, how to adjust it, and how to determine if it fits properly. 
Fit Testing:

Fit testing is done to find both a style and a size of respirator that fits the individual best and is most comfortable. There are two types of fit testing: Quantitative fit testing and qualitative fit testing. 
Field Testing:

Once the fit test has been performed and a respirator selected, the user should perform “field tests” on his respirator each time before entering the toxic atmosphere. These consist of both a negative-pressure test and a positive-pressure test. These tests apply to respirators with either a cartridge, canister, or filter. 
Negative-Pressure Test:

In this test, the user closes off the inlet of the canister, cartridge(s), or filter(s) by covering with palm(s) or squeezing the breathing tube; inhales gently so that the face piece collapses slightly; and holds the breath for about 10 seconds. If the facepiece remains slightly collapsed and no inward leakage is detected, the respirator is probably tight enough. 
Positive-Pressure Test:

The positive-pressure test is conducted by closing off the exhalation valve and exhaling gently into the face piece. The fit is considered satisfactory if slight positive pressure can be built up inside the face piece without any evidence of outward leakage.  

Hearing  Protection: Exposure to high noise levels (more than 90 decibel) can cause hearing loss or impairment. It can create physical and psychological stress. There is no cure for noise-induced hearing loss, so the prevention of excessive noise exposure is the only way to avoid hearing damage. 
 
F_ Sound Measurements:

Sound pressure levels are measured in Decibels (commonly abbreviated to dB) which is a logarithmic measure of sound pressure levels. It is a scale of ratio and not units of measurements. 
 
OSHA identifies 90 decibels based on an eight-hour time weighted average (TWA) as the absolute “safe” level of noise exposure. 85 dB is considered as the action level.

​

Permissible Noise Exposures:

 

Duration Per Day (Hours)          Sound Level dB                 

         8 hour                               90 dB

         4 hour                               95 dB

         2 hour                             100 dB

         1 hour                             105 dB

        ½ hour                             110 dB

        ¼ hour                             115 dB 

 

Types of Hearing Protectors:

Hearing protectors shall be made available and shall be worn by all employees exposed to an 8-hour TWA of 85 dB or greater. 
 
1. Ear Muffs

2. Ear Plugs

3. Ear Canal

 

Hearing protectors will always have an assigned Noise Reduction Rating (NRR) which should be printed on the packaging of each hearing protector. NRR is the amount of decibels by which a given device will reduce noise exposure, by subtracting the NRR value from the noise exposure levels.