
Road Safety?

Initial phases of the road safety problem:
Everyone is a road user. For most people, since childhood, the road has stood for discovery and freedom. “Taking to the road”, whether figurative or literal, means communicating, seeing other places and other people, and often other cultures. On a more practical level, as well as an economic one,roads represent a means for travelling to work and transporting goods.They provide access to rural areas,which would otherwise be very isolated.There is obviously a very close link between mobility and development.Roads account for 90 percent of all transport in the world.

The 1960s and 1970s in the West:
The large-scale shift of transport to the road and the onset of rapid motorization began at the end of the1950s, when the use of motor cars became common place in Western countries. As the number of road vehicles rose steeply, so too did the number of serious crashes.In the early 1970s, the slaughter on the roads reached unprecedented heights in high-income countries. Every year, road crashes took the life of one person in 3,000 and the trend continued to worsen. It was at this point that people first began to react against the fatalistic and silent acceptance of the human drama unfolding on the roads.It took more than ten years for people in high-income countries to realize that this passive attitude needed to change and that road usage should be better organized. It also took ten years for experts to understand that most road crashes and road crash casualties are due to four major factors: failure to use seat belts and crash helmets, speeding and driving under the influence of alcohol.Under pressure from road crash victims associations, the media and public personalities, Western governments finally reacted during the mid-1970s and introduced new legislation,which was duly enforced,initially concerning seat belts and speed limits. The effect was amazing, as can be seen in the road casualty graph for France since 1956.This trend is fairly typical for most Western European countries at that time. In the months following the introduction of these two measures, mortality rates due to road crashes stopped climbing.Gradually road safety departments were set up in most high-income countries. These departments were provided with the necessary resources and began to coordinate all public services around the same objective: reducing the frequency and severity of road crashes.The compulsory wearing of crash helmets and laws pertaining to drinking and driving were introduced and proved extremely effective.The curve also shows that it took France 30 years (until 1990) to get back to the road mortality levels of the1960s. Road safety is a long-term commitment.With growth in the number of both vehicles and road users in general, the global road safety problem is worsening each year, which is why measures must be launched immediately.
The present situation in low- to middle-income countries:
The pattern of the 1960s in the West has been repeated over the last ten years in low- and middle-income countries. Motorization rates have increased rapidly. The roads are frequented by a great diversity of users, particularly young pedestrians,who constitute the group at highest risk of being involved in a road crash. Although private cars do not yet outnumber other motor vehicles such as motorcycles, they will do so soon. Vehicle fleets including trucks, minibuses and taxis are also growing in number, while motorcycles have become the most popular form of family transport in South-East Asia and West Africa.
The scale of road safety problems in the world:

Recognizing the problem
Public awareness of death and injury on the roads in the world is quite a recent phenomenon and is due partly to the publication in 2004 of the World report on road traffic injury prevention,produced jointly by the World Bank and the World Health Organization (WHO). This report, which was translated into six languages, gives an idea of the scale of the crisis and proposes practical recommendations based on current knowledge about what works.Three thousand people, including 500 children, are killed every day on the world’s roads.More than eight out of ten deaths occur in low-and middle-income countries.This amounts to 1.2 million deaths a year. In addition, more than 50 million people are seriously injured; many are disabled for life. It is also worth noting that these figures,as shocking as they are,are an underestimate of the real scale of the problem. Due to under reporting and insufficient data collection, many low-and middle-income countries do not know exactly how many of their citizens die or are injured in road crashes annually.

Alarming trends:
The World report indicates that the number of road crash fatalities will increase world wide by 60 percent by 2020.Although they will continue to fall by 20 per cent in high-income countries,they are likely to grow by 80 percent in low-and middle-income countries unless targeted steps are taken immediately.Road crashes already kill as many people annually as major pandemics such as malaria or tuberculosis. They are the first cause of mortality among men and women aged between ten and 45, except in the countries worst affected by HIV/AIDS. This comparison illustrates the gravity of the problem and the urgency to take decisive action.
The very high cost of road crashes:
In low-income countries, the cost of road crashes is estimated to amount to 1 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP), not including the added burden of human suffering, which is not quantifiable. One percent of GDP is the equivalent of the public development aid received by low-income countries each year. This situation is particularly unacceptable considering that funding invested in road safety is very quickly recovered, often with added profit. In fact, road safety is without doubt an area where action by the public authorities can be profitable.Investing in road safety leads to economic savings while protecting both a country’s current population and its future generations.Making road safety a priority should not be equated with creating added burdens for road users, as is sometimes associated with the implementation of new or more stringent traffic laws such as speed limits or seat-belt laws. Making road safety a priority means placing a higher value on life and respecting others in the community we share.


Understanding road safety and the measures needed:
All countries which have managed to reverse sustainably the rising trend of road casualties in the past 30 years have one thing in common: political awareness. Unless policy-makers are won over to the issue of road safety, little can be done. The new thinking about road safety outlined in the World report can be summarized as follows:
Crashes are not an inevitable consequence of economic growth and they create a considerable economic burden to society (in terms of lives and money lost).
Road crash injury is largely preventable and predictable; it is a human-made problem amenable to rational analysis and countermeasures.
Tested, technically simple remedies are available, which can produce considerable returns for a relatively small investment.
The growing political awareness in high-income countries led rapidly to the establishment of special road safety departments, which could put forward action plans coordinated and funded by multiple relevant sectors.Road crashes often result from a series of root causes:the vehicle(a factor in 5 to 10 percent of crashes),road infrastructure(to which 10 to 20 percent of crashes may be attributed) and road user behaviour (which is responsible at least in part for some 80 to 90 per cent of road crashes).It is important to consider the vehicle/the road/the user as a system. The interactions between users and the physical elements are critical.Road and vehicle design must allow for human errors.

The vehicle:
Modern vehicles are considerably safer than older models.Manufacturers tend to agree that it will take time for future technological breakthroughs to make more advanced safety improvements. Technical safety standards and annual vehicle testing are compulsory in high-income countries.In contrast, low- and middle-income countries often have a substandard vehicle fleet,which exacerbate the road safety problem.This is particularly true for commercial vehicles such as taxis, buses and trucks, which account on average for 50 per cent of all vehicles in those countries. Effective and independent technical testing needs to be introduced as soon as possible in particular for commercial fleets.Testing must be strict where the vital safety functions of vehicles are concerned, such as braking, shocks and lighting.Another matter of concern in low- and middle-income countries is the overloading of commercial vehicles transporting goods or passengers(or both at once,as is often the case).It is essential to have regulations establishing maximum loads and that regular checks take place. Greater improvement of the public and commercial transport sector is one of the best ways of avoiding such overloading.Although the standard of a vehicle’s safety features is a critical part of the road safety system, substandard vehicles are still only the third main cause of road crashes. Road infrastructure is second.

The road infrastructure:
The road infrastructure,considered as a whole(including road surface,road signs and design),is a significant safety factor.Road designs should recognize that humans make mistakes and try to minimize the consequences of human error. It has been shown that some low-cost infrastructure improvements can substantially reduce the occurrence of road crashes and their severity. Examples of improvements include these paration of different types of traffic, better road markings and road signs, safer paths for pedestrians and two-wheelers, the constructionofsidewalksorpavementsandmorevisiblepedestriancrossings,andslower traffic speeds (with the use of road humps, rumble strips and roundabouts).On existing roads, these improvements should first be made at high-risk spots, where many crashes occur, especially at the entry and exit of built-up areas and areas of high activity (such as markets and schools).The same improvements should be incorporated in the design of new roads, whichmayotherwisebecomeasourceofcrashesinthefuture.Itisessentialthat road construction budgets for future roads include a provision for safety, which is by no means the case everywhere in the world.Practical technical guides are already available.Unsafe road infrastructure is a critical root cause of road crashes but it is by no means the main cause.


Human behaviour:
The behaviour of road users is, in fact, the main cause of road crashes and road crash injury and death. Among the many risk factors involved in causing road crashes or increasing injury severity, the four most common are:

1 the failure to wear seat belts
2 the failure to wear crash helmets
3 driving at excessive or unsuitable speeds; and
4 driving under the influence of alcohol.
Each of these primary risk factors is involved in 30 to 50 percent of fatal or disabling crashes worldwide, irrespective of the country. Countries which have introduced targeted action plans to combat a stone of the above risk factors have succeeded in reducing road crash fatalities by 20 to 40 per cent within a few years, even when the trend was previously rising steeply.Of course, there are other substantial risk factors, such as driver fatigue (which affects long-distance commercial transport drivers in particular), the use of mobile telephones, driving under the influence of drugs, failure to observe safety distances and a lack of visual aids for drivers. None of these risk factors should be overlooked.There are also the basic rules of the Highway Code, which users should comply with,such as the rules for giving way,overtaking,traffic lights and no-entry signs.For brevity and greatest impact, we have deliberately concentrated in this report on the four major risk factors, which are the cause of most road deaths.


The four major risk factors: 
Wearing seat belts can reduce the risk of death or serious injury by 50 per cent in the event of a crash.This is the most effective priority measure for injury reduction and the easiest to implement to protect vehicle occupants in a road crash. It is a simple, easy gesture that should become a habit.
All modern vehicles are equipped with a standardized belt system so that users do not need to pay separately for seat-belt installation.Checking the use of seat belts is easy and requires no special equipment or training for traffic police officers. It is advisable to proceed in stages,beginning with the compulsory use of seat belts in the front of the vehicle, then in the rear seats, including the use of special restraints for children.It should be noted that air bags are not a substitute for seat restraints and the two measures must be used together.

Wearing a crash helmet by motor cyclists reduces the risk of brain damage–which leads in many cases either to death or to mental disabilities–by 70 percent.This is a priority, especially in some countries in South-East Asia and West Africa, where motorcycles account for up to 75 percent of all registered vehicles. The use of crash helmets is more difficult to enforce than the use of seat belts.Indeed,users need first to buy a helmet,which costs about US$10 and whos equality should be certified according to an agreed national standard. Government incentives, such as tax relief on the sale of helmets,should be considered in low-income countries. Another worthwhile initiative would be to encourage motorcycle shops to sell helmets together with the motorcycles.Although heat is a major factor in many countries, the supply of useful “tropical” crash helmets is still inadequate. Also, users tend to give many excuses for not wearing a helmet, such as “it prevents me from seeing/hearing”; “it is ugly”, or “it messes up my hair”.
As in the case of other risk factors, it is beneficial to explain to the public why wearing a crash helmet is important and providing them with the scientific arguments before making helmets compulsory.Wearing seat belts in the front seat and helmets is already compulsory in most countries, but the rules are poorly enforced in about 70 percent of them.

Speed limits are also essential to reduce road crash deaths,especially among young pedestrians, who account for 50 per cent of road crash casualties in low- and middle-income countries.As noted above, a number of alterations need be made to the road infrastructure in order to force drivers to slow down in certain places. Provided that it is well signed,the speed hump is one of the most effective and cost-effective road safety improvements.An effort must be made at the same time to change the behaviour of users and to convince them that speed is a risk.Here,too,there are scientific arguments for speed reduction that can be put forward to the public.They must be constantly repeated in public campaigns and drivers must be encouraged to behave respectfully and non-aggressively.Speed limits exist in most countries. The limits taught to learners by driving schools are quickly forgotten if they are not clearly indicated on road signs and if law enforcement is weak.Enforcing speed limits,unlike seat-belt checks, does require some investment. Training and equipping police officials to use mobile and/or fixed radar appliances require some expense, but this will pay for itself very quickly through the collection of fines when such a system is in place and functioning properly.

Driving under the influence of alcohol,finally,is responsible,for 30 to 50 percent of road deaths and serious casualties depending on the country. The maximum legal limit beyond which drivers are liable to penalties in most Western countries is 0.5grams per litre.Scientific studies have shown,however,that even at this authorized maximum rate, the risk of a crash is double the risk taken by a person who has not drunk any alcohol.
While humans vary widely in their reaction to alcohol, in broad terms this is equivalent to about two 25 cc glasses of beer or two 3cc glasses of whisky (or other 40° alcoholic beverage). For women, young people, the elderly and light weight people,the limit of 0.5g/l may be reached by drinking even less.Consuming coffee,water or food does not lower alcohol content.There is no magic recipe.Eliminating alcohol from the system is a question of time. For example, for some individuals it can take two hours to eliminate the alcoholic effects of one 25cc glass of beer.It is worth remembering this, as most people do not know what 0.5 grams of alcohol per litre of blood means,how this limit is reached and how long the effects of alcohol on the body are likely to persist.Everyadditionalglassofalcoholincreasesadriver’slikelihoodoftakingrisksand further impairs the judgement and physical skills needed to operate a motor vehicle safely. More than half of the world’s countries lack legislation that sets a clear maximum limit on blood alcohol content for drivers and penalties for offenders. Establishing legislation is the first step to take. However the best advice for drivers is not to drink at all before driving.Even where legislation does exist in low- and middle-income countries, it is very rarely applied.The general public is often unfamiliar with the drinking and driving laws, which are often insufficiently enforced by traffic police. In many cases, the police are not equipped with alcohol tests for drivers and, in general, laws without enforcement are useless.

Changing the behaviour of road users:
Road user behaviour may be changed in various ways.There are short-term measures, which can be introduced immediately, and long-term measures, which are no less important but take more time both to implement and to bring about the desired results.One of the short-term measures that can be taken is to launch large-scale information campaigns highlighting the facts, enforcement and penalties related to the major risk factors noted above.It is generally the case that the greatest impact is made by a combination of information campaigns and enforcement.In the longer term, road safety education should be included as a part of the school curriculum and the quality of teaching at driving schools should be evaluated and improved where necessary.


Post-crash management:
An issue of additional critical importance in reducing road crash fatalities and injuries concerns post-crash management. This is not preventive but remedial action that involves improving pre-hospital emergency and rescue medical services, as well as the rehabilitation of disabled victims.

Measures needed to improve road safety:

Five emergency measures:
Increasing national awareness of the problem of road safety, first among decision-makers.
Establishing a system for the collection and analysis of crash data (causes of risk and black spots).
Establishing a lead agency for road safety responsible for preparing and implementing a coordinated plan of action.
Combating the four major risk factors through mass awareness campaigns backed up by a dedicated system of enforcement and penalties.
Encouraging the involvement of the private sector and national associations.

Five long-term measures: 
Improving the general condition of vehicles.
Introducing safety features in all existing and planned road systems.
Improving or introducing road safety education in schools and evaluating and improving the quality of driver training and testing.
Improving emergency services and the care of road crash victims and those disabled in road crashes.

Encouraging international cooperation.

Assessing the situation on the road network:
It is not always easy to be fully aware of the road safety situation in one’s own country. It can be even more difficult to compare it with the situation in other countries.


Collecting crash data:
Details are ideally required on where and when a crash occurred, the people and vehicles involved, the circumstances and causes of the crashes, and the material and human damage.This information is essential to understand the factors involved in individual road crashes. Detailed crash data is also necessary to show the political authorities the scope of the road safety problem, identify the kinds of targeted initiatives needed to prevent crashes and injury in a country and assess the impact of any measures taken.In most countries, the traffic police are responsible for collecting and maintaining information on road crashes, including noting the details of each road crash at the scene and reporting on all findings. The police should be given access to information concerning the injuries of road crash victims,who have been treated in the hospital, in order to be able to report on the nature of their injuries. Postcrash data collection that includes hospital data makes comprehensive reporting on the consequences of each crash possible,including injuries,fatalities and long term disabilities. The duration of the post-crash follow-up period varies from country to country from zero to 30 days. Monitoring of road crash injuries is critical in developing a picture of the actual scale of the road crash and road crash injury problem in a country.Experience shows that the simplest solution is to give the police the responsibility for gathering all data related to crash victims. It may also be noted that there are standard data collection forms in use in practically all regions of the world, which could be exchanged among countries.User-friendly software programmes are also available to computerize data processing and analysis.

Lack of data and underestimation of the road crash injury problem:
In countries that have no system in place for tracking crash victims in hospitals, road deaths can be underestimated by up to 200 per cent in some cases. Mortality data must take account of deaths both at the crash scene and subsequently in the hospital, which is not the case in the majority of low- and middle-income countries, i.e., in 80 per cent of the world.Some countries maintain a reliable road crash data collection system, while others take account only of damage occurring at the crash scene, and still others maintain no centralized data management system at all. This diversity makes it difficult if not impossible to make exact comparisons of the road safety situation among countries worldwide.While not perfect,existing figures do provide insight into the scale of the global road crash and road crash injury problem.

Road crash mortality in individual countries:
Several indicators must be considered simultaneously (and overtime) in order to assess the road safety situation in a country.The factors to be considered include the size and type of road network, the type and number of vehicles, the number of inhabitants, the number of crashes, the number of (light and serious) injuries and the number of deaths.In this guide we shall merely attempt to quantify road crash mortality, which is only one of several indicators.,established on the basis of data provided by the International Road Federation (IRF) and the World Health Organization, l networks.It may happen that the request for data does not reach the relevant department, but in most cases if countries do not report back it is because such dataareneithergatherednorprocessed.Obviouslyforthemthefirsttaskistoset up a data collection and management system.The countries with the lowest number of road casualties have a mortality rate per 100,000 inhabitants of between five and nine.These are chiefly highly motorizedcountrieswhichhavebeenconductingdedicatedroadsafetyprogrammes for the last ten to 30 years and where the road crash mortality rates have been falling annually.The main goal for these countries is to maintain the downward trend, which requires a sustained effort over time. This group is not homogeneous, however, since it includes countries where the statistics are considerably underestimated.Countries reporting between one and four deaths per 100,000 inhabitants clearly have a problem with data collection, since none of the leading road safety countries has achieved such low figures.Countries with between ten and 14 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants belong to the group of countries where roads are extremely dangerous. As under reporting of actual road crashes and road crash injuries is common in many countries, there may even be more deaths and injuries on the roads of countries in this group that are not reflected in the statistics. As motorization increases, the number and severity of road crashes in these countries are likely to increase as well.In countries with more than 15 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants, whether the data is underestimated or not,road mortality has reached alarming levels.In most cases the situation will become worse as motorization increases, unless action is taken.

Road mortality according to regions:
Another to WHO in 2002, illustrates annual mortality per 100,000 inhabitants.This time the figures are broken down by sub-region, which gives a lessaccuratebut undoubtedly more eloquent picturethanthepreviousmap.Itisalsoworthnotingthatresearchandestimates have been carried out regarding road crash mortality rates for countries with little or no data.This has reduced the number of grey areas as much as possible so as to show the main regional trends.The mortality rates are highest in Africa and the Middle East.These regions are followed by Asia,nearly the whole of the Pacific Ocean basin and Eastern Europe where the situation is also very bad.Then come the Americas where the situation is still poor overall. Lastly we have Australia, Japan, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea and Western Europe, where for the time being the conditions are the least bad.The road crash and road crash injury situation is improving in only 20 percent of countries, mainly in the high-income bracket. In the rest of the world it is deteriorating rapidly.Does this mean to say that road safety is a question of money? Experience has shown that funding is critical, but money alone will not remedy the situation.Some low- and middle-income countries have succeeded in reversing the number of fatalities on their roads,which shows that political will is critical.Resources are needed, certainly, but on a relatively moderate scale. Expenditure on road safety can be considered a sound investment in view of the income generated (e.g., via fines collected from people who break traffic laws) and the lives saved.Taking action immediately It is important to note that, while it is of course important to gather data before initiating action,choosing the best measures and gauging their effectiveness,it is not worth waiting until a complete and accurate picture of the problem emerges before starting to deal with it.
In order to obtain an idea of whether the road safety situation is critical in a particular country,it is usually enough to consult doctors and surgeons in the trauma departments of the country’s major hospitals or the road traffic police,whose reports are generally both instructive and revealing. Roadside observation will quickly show whether helmets and seat belts are being worn, giving a good idea of road safety behaviour.Rapid action should be taken to deal with the major risk factors,regardless of the short comings and inadequacies of the crash data collection system,the quality of the road network and the condition of the country’s vehicles.

Organizing road safety:
Combating road safety problems must be a combined effort by different government sectors, chiefly transport, public security, health, education and justice.Experience from countries that have succeeded in improving the safety of their roads shows that multi-sector cooperation on road safety is critical to bringing about long-term improvement.Cooperation among government,the private sector and civil society organizations on road safety improvement has proven effective in many countries.The government is ultimately responsible for the safety of a country’s roads and should take on the leading role in road safety improvement. Only government can develop and implement policy and legislation on road safety,make the kinds of budgets available that are necessary for long term improvements, ensure that traffic laws are consistently enforced, organize national information campaigns, introduce road safety into the school curriculum, establish standards for driver training and testing as well as for vehicles and ensure that the road network is properly planned and maintained.

A tested road safety system:
Countries where the number of annual road crash deaths is falling generally have a well-developed road safety system.This consists in setting up a lead agency as a road safety department, that has access to adequate long-term resources and funding,headed by a competent individual who is well respected with in the various relevant government ministries. The head of the department must have a well-qualified staff of individuals to work with.This government department is usually attached to the Ministry of Transport or traffic police.It is responsible for implementing national road safety policy,which is often agreed on and monitored by an inter-ministerial road safety committee,made up of the ministers of relevant departments and chaired by a senior politician. The head of the road safety department will often act as secretary-general of the inter-ministerial committee, which meets several times a year.Countries possessing a national road safety platform, which includes the public and private sectors and civil society, have made quicker progress than others in the fight against road violence. Regardless of the name given to this national body or its mode of operation, it is extremely useful. Its membership is representative of a broader sector of society and it can thus provide a wider vision of road safety. In addition, it may propose policy guidelines to the government, while advising on and at times criticizing national policy in order to make improvements and fill in possible gaps.Provincial (local)road safety structures can be equally critical to ensuring that national policy on road safety is applied appropriately at the local level.


National road safety policy:

A national road safety policy must be set out in a paper, preferably a five-year plan of action, which can serve as a road map for all the parties involved in road safety improvement, at both the national and the provincial level. This paper should contain clear, realistic and quantifiable objectives, a budget and a precise definition of the roles and responsibilities of each of the players in all the following areas:
1 Road safety management.
2 Road crash data collection and analysis.
3 Road safety financing
4 Road safety in road construction and maintenance.
5 Black-spot identification and treatment.
6 Technical vehicle testing.
7 Road safety training in schools.
8 Driving lessons and the issue of driving licences.
9 Special training for professional drivers.
10 Legislation and regulation.
11 Information and awareness campaigns.
12 Security forces and law enforcement.
13 Aid for victims.
14 Road crash cost assessment.
15 Road safety research.
16 Private sector and association partnerships.​

Financing road safety:

Insufficient and unstable financing: 
Funding for road safety measures is often inadequate,especially in low-and middle-income countries. Inadequate financing is a considerable obstacle to taking dedicatedaction.It is also often as ignofalack of political will to tackle the problem.While it is obviously important that sufficient funding should be allocated to road safety, steps should be taken to ensure that this funding remains constant over the longer term. In the case of road safety and indeed for any other policy area that benefits society at large, appropriate planning, forecasting and action must take place on a long-term scale.Stable financing is essential in order to maintain a responsible agency,as described in the previous chapter, and fund the necessary measures (such as data collection, campaigns, enforcement, infrastructures or education).

Available solutions A number of financing mechanisms may be used.The most common include:
A percentage levied on fuel tax.
A percentage levied on vehicle insurance premiums.
A percentage levied on fines.
A percentage of the national road maintenance fund.
A percentage of the construction budget for new roads.

The amount of each percentage is obviously a political choice and should depend not only on the national economic situation but also on the degree of urgency of the action required.There is no set rule in this respect and the percentage could vary between 1and10 percent depending on the country and the type of tax chosen.
A levy of 1 per cent on the price of fuel or on insurance premiums does not generally have a large negative impact on the population, especially if government policy in this respect is transparent regarding the total amount of funding collected and how this funding is used to improve road safety. In terms of the type of tax, some countries are very innovative, for instance by levying a tax on alcohol, which is directly allocated to road safety.
Partnershipscanprovideawayofalleviatingthestatebudgetbycontributingadditional resources for special projects such as information campaigns, special events or training in schools. Oil companies, automobile and motorcycle manufacturers and insurers tend to be the most likely partners for these activities and their cooperation should be sought.As we have had already pointed out, experience from countries with well-developed road safety programmes shows that investing in road safety can lead to economic savings.

Mobilizing decision-makers:

Speeding up the process of political decision-making and disseminating good practice are the two main objectives of road safety mobilization and forums.At global level World Health Day in April 2004 was devoted to road safety and marked a major turning point in global awareness of the problem. It gave publicity to the World report on road traffic injury prevention, which serves as a benchmark publication on current road safety and which we would encourage those interested in road safety to consult. The report gives a clear description of the most relevant road safety issues and proposes practical solutions, most of which are summarized in this practical guide for the special use of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement.
Following World Health Day 2004, the United Nations (UN) adopted several resolutions on road safety for the first time in its history.These resolution surged member states to follow the recommendations of the report and to combat road violence with greater determination. WHO was given responsibility for coordinating the efforts of the UN agencies working on road safety, especially through its regional commissions.
A global platform was established,including the UN agencies and some 30 active organizations, including the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and the Global Road Safety Partnership(GRSP).This forum, known as the United Nations Road Safety Collaboration, meets twice a year to compare initiatives and pool activities.Global guides to good practices One of the initiatives of the UN collaboration has been to produce a series of good practice manuals on key road safety topics that can be used internationally.WHO, the World Bank, the Global Road Safety Partnership and the FIA(Fédération internationaledel’automobile) Foundation have cooperated to produce and publish a first series of practical manuals on the following topics: the four major risk factors noted in this toolkit, road crash data collection and analysis, and road safety management.The first two in the series area l ready available, focusing on increasing the use of crash helmets and on drinking and driving. The GRSP is currently helping some ten Southeast Asian countries draft national action plans or review existing ones in order to make helmet wearing become common practice as this toolkit advocates.This action is being carried out by the Global Road Safety Initiative, which is financed by a group of multinational companies that are part of GRSP.This initiative is innovative and laudable, and deserves to be highlighted in light of the fact that so little international funding is currently devoted to road safety.
Activating international cooperation Bilateral and multilateral funding agencies agree that the road safety crisis in developing countries is serious, although very few of them actually include road safetyasapartoftheirdevelopmentaidpackages.Thismaybeattributedtosome extent to the fact that awareness about the road safety pandemic is fairly recent, even among donor organizations and governments. More effort is needed to raise awareness within this critical target group about the road safety problem in low- and middle-income countries and the actions they can take to alleviate the situation.
In this regard,it is worth mentioning one initiative in particular. The Commission for Global Road Safety’s “Make roads safe” campaign, which is supported by the FIA Foundation,proposesthat10per cent of the budget of all new roads financed by international aid should be devoted to road safety.
At the national level Convincing politicians to take action to improve road safety is certainly the first priority in most countries where, as we have already mentioned, at present road safety policy is generally lacking and the situation is becoming worse.
Here,theprivatesectorandcivilsocietyhaveanespeciallycrucialroletoplay,not as substitutes for the state but by reminding it of its responsibilities.
Automobile clubs, road victim associations, automobile and motorcycle manufacturers, insurance companies, research institutions, influential public personalities, the media in general and of course National Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies should launch a political debate on road safety and create public awareness. They can also contribute expertise and supplement state budgets in order to implement more rapidly the necessary measures.The map number 3 (page 24) shows that 27 per cent of National Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies lobbied for road safety in 2005:5 percent of National Societies took part in road safety forums in 2005, 14 per cent in mobilization activities,while 8 percent did both.This is a positive sign and we hope this practical guide will encourage many more National Societies to promote road safety at the highest level, especially wherever more decisive action needs to be taken, and to mobilize their countries decision-makers.