Child Safety Seat Belt Usage:

​https://res.cloudinary.com/df622sxkk/image/upload/v1753123622/Screenshot_2025-07-22_at_12.16.54_AM_q9hktk.png
​
Driving Safety in Rain:

Be Focused
Keep both hands on the steering wheel at all times! Keep all distractions, such as cell phones or even the radio, off and away from you. While focus to your front do Take a Look in Back View Mirror as well Right Hand side & Left Hand side so that you get an 360 degree over view what is happening around. 

Distance From Next Car:
Reduce your speed and leave more space between you and the vehicle in front to account for greater stopping distances – remember the Three-second rule. Drive at or below the speed limit to the extent that you are comfortable with, and can see far enough in front of you to appropriately make driving decisions. As speed increases, wet traction is considerably reduced. Since hydroplaning can result in a complete loss of traction and vehicle control, you should always reduce speed when driving in wet weather. 

Lights:
Use dipped headlights so that other drivers can see you more easily. Look out for large or fast-moving vehicles creating spray which reduces visibility. Be more alert watching for brake lights in front of you. Use double light warning indicator to aware cars behind you from danger that will reduce the chances of hit from back. 

Avoid Flooded Roads:
Never drive through standing or flowing water in a road way unless you have no choice. Flooding the engine of your car can cause the engine to stall, and deep water can actually float your car and take it off the roadway. When driving through a puddle of uncertain depth, go slow. If it's deeper than the bottom of your doors, turn around and find another route. Deep water can cause serious damage to a modern car's electrical system. 

Hydroplaning: 
Be aware of hydroplaning. This is where your vehicle travels on top of the water and has NO or very little contact with the ground. Your traction is reduced significantly. To safely get out of a hydroplaning situation let off the gas and steer straight or slightly in the direction you must go. Do not make sudden motions and remain calm.

Warning:
Hydroplaning happens when the water in front of the tires builds up faster than the vehicles weight can push out of the way. The water pressure causes the vehicle to rise up and slide in a thin layer of water between the tires and the road. At this point, the vehicle can be completely out of contact with the road, and in danger of skidding or drifting out of the lane.

If you find yourself hydroplaning or skidding:

1.Do not brake or turn suddenly.
2.Ease your foot off the gas until the vehicle slows and you can feel traction on the road again.
3.Turn your steering wheel in the direction of the skid. As you recover control, gently straighten the wheels; and
4.If you need to brake, do it gently with light pumping action. Your vehicle has anti-lock brakes, then brake normally. Because the vehicle computer will mimic a pumping action. 

How Are Your Tires?
Check your tires on a regular basis. Bald tires significantly reduce your traction on wet roadways, and offer little resistance to hydroplaning. When your tires run over water, the water is displaced and it needs somewhere to go quickly. The best place is between the treads of your tires. If your tires are bald, the water has no place to go and you end up riding on a layer of water, like a boat. If your tire are bald drive at slow speed.

Turn On The Defroster: 
if the windshield begins to fog. In hot, muggy weather, air conditioned air (which cannot contain as much moisture) will usually clear the inside of the windshield faster than non air conditioned. 

Driving In Rainy Night:
Beware of driving in the rain, especially at night. Raindrops on side windows and mirrors cause to reduce visibility. Look out for large or fast-moving vehicles creating spray which reduces visibility. Keep the lights on side windows and mirror clear and drive calmly and be focused.   

Drive Safely……..Your Family is Waiting for you.

Tips for Winter Driving:
Driving requires all the care and caution possible any time of year. But winter driving has even greater challenges because of wet and icy road surfaces, longer hours of darkness and poor visibility because of snow, rain and fog.

Today well look at the first 6 of 12 tips to help you drive more safely this winter.

1. Allow enough time to get to your destination. Rushing in difficult driving conditions can lead to an accident. Turn your radio on to listen to the road report and weather forecast. Leave a few minutes earlier in the morning, and allow plenty of time to get to work. Buckle up your seat belt or safety restraint before you start driving.

2. Stay alert. Don't drive when you are under the influence of alcohol, drugs or certain medications. Read the labels of prescription drugs and over-the-counter medicines to determine if they can cause drowsiness. Driving demands your full attention.

3. Stay calm. Sometimes other drivers will become frustrated with slow-moving traffic. Keep your temper and don't let other drivers aggravate you. Maintain a safe speed and drive defensively.

4. Keep a safe distance between you and other vehicles. The "two second rule" works well on dry roads and in ideal conditions, but in winter you should extend it to four seconds. Watch the vehicle directly ahead of you. As it passes a stationary object start counting - "one thousand and one", "one thousand and two", and so on. Your vehicle should not pass the same object until you say the word "four."

5. Keep your car well-maintained and in good working order. This includes having good tread on your tires, the engine tuned-up for winter, and all lights functioning properly. In colder climates, you may need to add anti-freeze to the radiator. In some areas, gasoline antifreeze may be required.

6. Clean your windows and headlights frequently. Keep your windshield washer fluid topped up. Good visibility is essential to safe driving. Clean your windows and headlights of ice or snow before starting out, and repeat frequently throughout your trip.

7. Drive appropriately for the road conditions. The posted speed limit may be too fast under winter conditions. Driving on a wet road can cause hydroplaning as a thin barrier of water builds up between your tires and the road surface, causing your vehicle to slip. If you begin to lose control of your steering, take your foot off the gas.

8. Stay with your vehicle if it breaks down. Put on your emergency flashers and wait for assistance. Carry a sign for your window, asking other motorists to tell the police you need help.

9. Wait out bad weather. Strong icy winds in combination with snow or dust can make it impossible to see where you are driving - or walking. Under these conditions it is usually safest to stay with your vehicle and wait out the storm.

10. Plan your moves carefully. In slippery conditions, never jam on your brakes in a panic stop, you will most likely skid and lose control of the vehicle. Instead, pump your brakes gently a few times.

11. Avoid driving through deep puddles, especially at high speeds. The water can make your brakes less effective and, if deep enough, can cause serious engine damage. If you must drive through water and you are not sure about the depth, slow right down and cautiously inch forward until you are certain it is safe.

12. Quit driving when you begin to feel sleepy. If you have a long distance to drive, take frequent short breaks for fresh air and a walk around the vehicle.

​
Safe overtaking and being overtaken safely:
The Law:

1, Death by Dangerous Driving can result in;

14 Years in prison

Unlimited fine

Driving ban of at least 2 year

2, Dangerous Driving can result in;

5 Years in prison

Unlimited fine

Driving ban of at least 1 year

3, Dangerous Driving can result in;

£2,500 fine

3 - 9 Penalty Points

Reasons For Overtaking:

1, To pass a stationary vehicle

2, To pass another road user moving extremely slowly

3, To pass another road user moving more slowly

The first two usually make overtaking unavoidable but on a single carriageway the third should be avoided. Drivers should relax and keep a safe distance from the vehicle in front. Overtaking in these circumstances is unlikely to make much difference in journey time.

Note:IT IS NOT WORTH RISKING YOUR LIFE AND OTHERS TO ARRIVE A FEW MINUTES SOONER. 

Before Overtaking look out for and consider:

1, Road signs - Do not overtake if the road is about to narrow, you are approaching a junction or any other hazard warning. Be aware of the speed limit as well and the speed needed to overtake.

2, Road markings - Solid white lines in the middle of the road or the gaps in a broken white line becoming shorter means no overtaking.

3, Road layout - Look out for bends or blind summits.

4, Approaching vehicles - Be 100% certain that there is enough clear road between you to allow overtaking.

5, Safe return gap - Make sure there is enough room for you to safely return to the left hand side after overtaking.      

6, Speed of vehicle in front - It must be travelling slowly enough for you to overtake without breaking the speed limit.

7, Speed & position of vehicle behind - Double check your blind spot and check to see if they are increasing their speed or indicating.

8, Road conditions - Do not overtake in fog or heavy rain and consider any signs of ice on the road.

9, If you have any doubt about being able to overtake safely then don't do it.

During Overtaking: After making certain that it is safe to overtake carry out the following steps:

1, General;

Move up to the vehicle in overtaking position - Do not get too close and the longer the vehicle the further back you should be to allow you to see the road ahead.

Adjust speed to the vehicle in front

Use mirrors, signal, check blind spot again and start to move out

Move out, and check ahead again - If it isn't safe then return back behind the vehicle

Accelerate past the vehicle - Make sure you are not breaking the speed limit and pass slowly and allow plenty of room if you are overtaking a cyclist or horse rider.

When you are past,  check your nearside mirror and move back into the left hand lane - You should not have to brake sharply as you pull in front of the vehicle just passed.

2, On Motorways/Dual Carriageways;

Never overtake on the inside - Unless all lanes are moving in queues and the inside lane is moving faster.

Never use the hard shoulder to overtake - Unless directed to do so by police or road works

Indicate when moving back left after overtaking - Look out for other vehicles indicating to move into the same lane.

Do not cut in too soon - cancel the indicator when the manoeuvre is finished

3, Parked Vehicles;

As well as the General advice above you should also be aware of:

Road Junctions - Look out for cars pulling out into the lane you are using to overtake.

Pedestrians - Look out for any emerging from between parked vehicles.

4, Large Vehicles;

Visibility - Larger vehicles restrict the view of the road ahead. Hanging back before overtaking allows a better view.

Speed Variations - Larger vehicles may crawl uphill but pick up speed going downhill.

Side Winds - Overtaking a large vehicle might shelter you from these until you get past.

Left Hand Drive Trucks - Foreign left hand trucks have a blind spot on their right hand side and particular care is needed to make sure they are not about to pull out as you overtake.

Spray - In poor road conditions overtaking large vehicles can reduce visibility drastically.

 

Being Overtaken:

1, Maintain a steady course and if necessary slow down to allow overtaking. Never accelerate.

2, Drop back to keep a 2 second gap if somebody pulls into the gap in front of you.

3, Do not hold up a queue of traffic. Pull in where it is safe and allow faster vehicles to overtake if necessary.

4, Check mirrors frequently.

​

Driver Safety:

​

Fatigue:
 

The dangers of fatigue or driving when you are tired greatly increase your accident risk.

 

To minimise this risk the Highway Code recommends the following measures:

Make sure you are fit to drive. Do not undertake a long journey (longer than an hour) if you feel tired.

Avoid undertaking long journeys between midnight and 6am, when natural alertness is at a minimum;

Plan your journey to take sufficient breaks.  A minimum break of 15 minutes after every two hours of driving is recommended

If you feel at all sleepy, stop in a safe place.  Do not stop on the hard shoulder of a motorway;

The only effective way to counter sleepiness is to take at least 150ml of caffeine (coffee or energy drink) and also to take a short nap of around 15 minutes. Fresh air, exercise or turning up the radio may help for a short time but are no substitute.

​

Accidents: 
It is the responsibility of the authorised driver to be aware of the legal obligations arising from being involved in an accident.

If a vehicle is involved in an accident with a third party the full facts must be reported to Admin’ as soon as possible.  Details of any accident resulting in serious injury or death must be reported immediately to the police.  Accidents resulting in minor injury must be reported to the police within a 24-hour period. 

 

The following details should be exchanged with the third party/ies:

Driver name, Company name and address;

Insurance policy details;

Vehicle registration number.

 

Prior to leaving the scene of any accident notes, and photographs where possible/applicable, should be taken of the following

The full names and addresses of any independent witnesses;

Details of any conversations with either third parties or witnesses;

Any damage to vehicles;

Date, time and exact location;

Weather conditions and road surface;

Road width, markings, traffic signs, any obstructions, skid marks, positions of vehicles, debris etc;

Any signals made prior to the accident.

​

Breakdown procedure
 

In the event of a breakdown:

Try to pull over onto the edge of the road or onto the hard shoulder;

Put on the vehicle hazard warning lights to alert other road users;

If possible use the passenger door to exit the vehicle and move away from the vehicle, on motorways move behind the crash barrier and onto the side verge;

Where a warning triangle is supplied it should be placed at least 45 metres behind the vehicle, but only if it is safe to do so.  This should not be attempted on a motorway;

When in a safe position contact Admin’ to give details of the breakdown and request that the recognised breakdown service provider be contacted;

If the driver feels threatened, e.g. by a vehicle/individual stopping, they should return to the passenger seat and lock all doors.  In order to communicate with anyone outside the vehicle whilst in this situation the window should be lowered just enough to allow conversation.  The vehicle should be exited as soon as the driver feels it is safe to do so.

Foggy Days Driving Safety:

As the winter season advances foggy days may be expected ahead. It is advised that motorists observe certain precautions to avoid accidents and related injuries. Motorists are advised to take following measures to avoid mishaps due to fog:-
 

DOs :

1. Before you drive -- and during your trip – check weather forecasts.

2.  If there is a fog warning, delay your trip until it clears.  

3. If you are caught driving in fog, follow these safe-driving tips.

4.  Slow down gradually and drive at a speed that suits the conditions.

5.  Make sure the full lighting system of your vehicle is turned on.

6. Use your low –beam headlights, High beams reflect off the moisture droplets in the fog, making it   harder to see.   7.  If you have fog lights on your vehicle, use them, in addition to your low-beams.

8.  Be patient, Avoid passing, changing lanes and crossing traffic.

9. Use pavement marking to help guide you. Use the right edge of the road as a guide, rather than the centre line. 10.  Increase your following distance. You will need extra distance to brake safely

11.  Look and listen for any hazards that may be ahead.

12.  Reduce the distractions in your vehicle. For example, turn off your cell phones, music your full attention is required.

13.  Watch for any electronically operated warning signs.

14.  Keep looking ahead as far as possible.

15.  Keep your windows and mirrors clean. Use your defroster and wipers to maximize your vision.

16.  If the fog is too dense to continue, pull completely off the road and try to position your vehicle in a safe parking area. Turn on your emergency flashers, in addition to keeping on your low-beam headlights.
 
DON’Ts :

1. Don’t stop on the travelled portion of the road. You could become the first link in a chain-reaction collision.

2.  Don’t speed up suddenly, even if the fog seems to be clearing. You could find yourself suddenly back in fog.

3.  Don’t speed up to pass a vehicle moving slowly or to get away from a vehicle that is following too closely.

4. Do not overdrive your headlights.


Using Safety Equipment:

Factors about two-Wheelers in India:

1, 69 % of total motorized vehicle are 2 wheelers.

2, 2 wheeler rider is 30 times more likely to be killed than a car driver.

3, Death most common in young people. 72% in age group of 20-30 years.

Why two-Wheeler rider are more vulnerable to accidents?

1, Share same road with fast moving cars, buses and trucks.

2, Lack of physical protection.

3, Less visible

4, Lack of proper education about road rules & safe driving. 

Most Common cause of death is Head Injury:​

Why head injuries are serious?

1, 75% to 88% of the death due to Head Injury.

2, Treatment very costly.

3, Requires long hospitalization & follow up.

4, High changes of disability even after treatment / recovery.

What can we do?

1, Prevention is better than cure.

2, We can’t prevent using 2-wheeler but can prevent Head-Injury. 

USE HELMET  Helmets are effective in reducing the likelihood of Head Injury as well as their severity.

Mechanism of Head Injury:

Injuries: Direct (or) Indirect

How a Helmet Works?

Reduces severity by reducing impact force. 

1, Outer hard coat – Mechanical barrier- no direct contact

2, Impact absorbing layer (1.5cm to 3cm)

    1, Absorb some of the impact  

    2, Head comes to a halt more slowly so reduced deceleration – less injury

Components of a Helmet:

Comfort Padding  - Keeps Head comfortably        

                          - Helmet fits snugly.

Spread the impact over a greater surface area so they are not concentrated on a particular area of skull 

Chin Strap – should not be loose, otherwise Helmet will come out during accident. 

Advantages of Helmet:

1, likelihood of death by 39%, 

2, Risk & severity of injury by 72%, 

3, Cost of Health Care.   

4, Prevents collision with flying insects.

5,  Riding in rain possible

6, Helps in controlling sunburn.

7, Protects your eyes from the blast of moving air & dust. 

  