
Tower Safety continuous..........

20, Power & Hand Tools: 
 
Power Tools:-

Tool manufacturer guards shall remain in place and unaltered.

Point-of-operation guards may require ongoing adjustment to perform correctly (portable grinders) or may be self-adjusting (circular saw blade guard).

Electric hand tools shall be double insulated;

All electric hand tools when used in the field, within six feet of water, or in rain shall be plugged into a GFCI receptacle or be equipped with GFCI protection; 

Pneumatic power tools shall be secured to the hose by some positive means (i.e. quick connect). Never use air hoses or extension cords for raising or lowering tools and materials to and from the work area;

All fuel-powered tools shall be in the off position during refueling or while performing maintenance repairs;

When using power tools, safety glasses are required and hearing protection is required if sound levels exceed 85 dBA (circular saw, portable grinders, many air powered tools); and

Any tool not in proper working order shall be removed from service until repairs are made. 

 
Hand Tools:-

The important aspect of hand tool use is to remember to use hand tools that are in good condition and intended for the work to be performed.

Hammer and sledge handles and heads should be inspected for damage, and swing radius checked for other workers.

Chisels and punches should be inspected prior to use for mushroomed heads, and firmly based prior to striking.

Wrenches and pliers should be inspected prior to use for cracks, oil/grease, and worn or damaged grips. Wrenches shall not be paired with other tools as a lever or for unintended use.

Hand saws shall be inspected prior to use for defects and cracked or worn blades. Store saws so that there is no chance for someone to fall onto or bump into their blades.

Appropriate Personal Protective Equipment must be worn when using tools.

Use the proper tool for the job. 

 

21, Railroad Safety Guidelines: 
 
The following list of safety procedures need to be adhered to at all times when accessing sites near railroad tracks: 
 

Yellow vests are required (red clothing is not allowed). 

Protective headgear and steel toed boots must be worn. 

Always be on alert for trains or other moving equipment while working on or near any railroad tracks. 

Do not step or walk on the top of the rail, frog, switches, guardrails or other track components. 

When working, walking on, or crossing the track, look in all directions for approaching trains or equipment. 

Take proper precautions when on or crossing behind trains or equipment on the track. 

Cross tracks at a 90 degree angle and stay clear of tracks as work allows. 

Keep all vehicles at least 20 feet away from the tracks. 

 

22, Temperature Extremes: 
 
Heat Stress Working in hot environments can cause several different types of health problems. The symptoms and recommended treatment measures are outlined below. 
 
Symptoms of Heat Rash:

Reddened, sensitive rash, usually located under arms, between legs, or around the waist 
 
Treatment of Heat Rash:

Keep area clean;

Stress personal hygiene;

Change into clean shirt, underwear at mid-shift. 

 
Symptoms of Heat Exhaustion:

Increased pulse rate 

Flushed or reddened complexion

Slightly elevated body temperature

Profuse sweating

Nausea

Lightheadedness 

 
Treatment of Heat Exhaustion:

Rest in a cool, shaded area;

Replenish fluids and electrolytes;

Do not return to work until pulse and temperature return to normal and nausea subsides. 

 
Symptoms of Heat Stroke:

Reddened complexion

Absence of perspiration

Elevated body temperature (above 105 degrees F)

Nausea

Unconsciousness 

 
Treatment of Heat Stroke:

Move victim to cool shaded area;

Remove any PPE or heavy clothing (coveralls, welding gear, etc.);

Dowse victim with cool water;

Force liquids if conscious;

Notify emergency medical services.

 

                               Note: These responses must be implemented immediately. Heat stroke is a life-threatening condition. 
 
Heat Stress Prevention:

The elements of this section shall be implemented when the ambient temperature reaches 80º Fahrenheit (26º C). These elements are designed to minimize the potential for heat-related health complications. While these efforts have proven to be beneficial, their implementation cannot guarantee that workers will not suffer from heat stress. 
 
Fluid Replenishment:

An ample supply of potable water shall be provided at the work site.

Water shall be maintained at a cool temperature, preferably between 40-60º F (4-15º C).

Workers should be encouraged to consume between 8-16 ounces of water at every break.

A supply of electrolytically enhanced fluids (e.g. Gatorade) should be maintained at the jobsite in addition to the potable water. Workers should consume between 8-16 ounces of these fluids per day. 

 
Breaks:

Breaks should be taken at regular intervals in a cool, shaded location. As temperatures increase, the number of breaks should increase also.

Workers should take breaks if they exhibit any of the symptoms of heat stress outlined in section III.B. 

 
Miscellaneous Preventive Techniques:

Workers may opt to use chemically treated personal cooling devices.

Portable misting fans may be used during long periods of high temperatures.

Wetting shirts or headbands may provide relief in very high temperatures.

Workers should be advised to minimize or eliminate the use of alcoholic beverages during off- hours due to the diuretic effects of alcohol. 

 
Heat Stress Monitoring:

In addition to conducting visual observations of workers for signs of heat stress, the following steps should be taken to measure the potential ill effects of heat exposure. If a worker exhibits any of the following symptoms, the treatment measures listed should be implemented. 
 

The worker’s pulse rate is sustained for 3-4 minutes at a rate of 180 bpm minus the worker’s age. 

The workers pulse rate is greater than 110 bpm one minute after a peak work effort.

The worker has a core body temperature greater than 100.4º F (38º C). 

 
Cold Stress: This section addresses the hazards and control measures associated with performing work in cold conditions. The potential for cold stress is measured by a combination of ambient temperature, air movement, and the type of work being performed. The two primary types of cold stress are hypothermia and frostbite. 
 
Symptoms of Hypothermia:

Shivering;

Pain in extremities;

Reduced mental alertness;

Core body temperature below 96.8º F (36º C). 

 
Treatment of Hypothermia:

Move the victim to a warm area;

Remove any wet or damp clothing;

Provide warm liquids that do not contain caffeine. 

 
Symptoms of Frostbite:

Numbness or tingling of extremities (fingers, toes, ears, nose);

Discoloration of extremities due to formation of ice crystals under the skin. 

 
Treatment of Frostbite:

Move victim to a warm area;

Warm affected extremities by direct exposure to warming device or immersion in warm water.

 

                                  Note: Do not apply forceful pressure to areas that have become discolored. 
 
Cold Stress Prevention:

The following controls shall be implemented when ambient or equivalent chill temperature (ECT) temperature reaches the identified levels: 
 
Below 40º F (4º C)

Workers should wear layered clothing appropriate for the level of cold and physical activity;

If working in windy and/or damp conditions, the outer layer of clothing should be designed to resist wind and/or be impermeable to moisture;

Gloves should be worn;

Provisions for warming the hands (war-air jets, radiant heaters) should be provided if fine work without gloves is to be performed. 

 
ECT Below 20º F (-7º C)

Heated shelters should be provided;

Employees should be encouraged to use the shelters;

At the onset of shivering, minor frostbite, drowsiness, or euphoria, workers should immediately return to the shelter;

Upon entering the shelter, the outer layer of clothing should be removed and inner layers should be loosened to permit sweat evaporation;

Warm, sweet drinks should be provided;

The intake of coffee should be limited due to the diuretic and circulatory effects. 

 
ECT Below 10º F (-12º C)

Workers should be under constant observation (Buddy System or Supervisor);

Work rate should not be so high as to cause heavy sweating;

Sitting or standing still should be minimized. 

 
ECT Below -30º F (-35º C)

  1. Skin exposure should not be allowed. 
 
ECT Below -50º F (-45º C)

 1.  All non-emergency work must cease. 
 
Employee Education and Training:

Company employees and subcontractors should receive instruction designed to increase their awareness and understanding of the hazards of performing work in temperature extremes. The contents of this program should be explained to all workers prior to engaging in work performed under temperature extremes. 
 
23, Fleet/DOT Safety: 
 
The driver is responsible for the safety of all passengers and for the stability of all material and equipment in the vehicle. The driver must possess a valid driver’s license for the class of vehicle driven. 
 

Use of cell phones while operating an company vehicle is prohibited. 

Only authorized employees are permitted to operate an company vehicle. 

All passengers must be seated with seat belts fastened while the vehicle is in motion. 

Inspect the vehicle before driving. 

Comply with the speed limits and all traffic control signs and devices. 

Look before backing up. Use a ground guide when visibility is blocked. 

Engage parking brake and chock wheels of trucks or trailers before loading or unloading material. 

Stay a safe distance from the vehicle in front of you. 

Driving under the influence of drugs (prescription/illegal) or alcohol is strictly prohibited. 