
Tower Safety Continues.....................

​

Gin Poles: 

Only manufactured gin poles with certified capacity shall be used on any site.

A load-rating chart provided by the manufacturer shall remain with the gin pole at all times.

Gin poles shall be inspected during assembly prior to use on a specific project, after any abnormal occurrence, and annually. Onsite inspections can consist of a visual inspection and be performed by site personnel knowledgeable in use of the gin pole. The annual inspection shall be a more thorough inspection that is documented and performed by a qualified person.

Lubrication of the “rooster head” bearings and pulleys should be performed prior to placing the gin pole into use.

Sizing and adjustment of the side plates and sheave should be considered to ensure smooth and safe movement of the wire rope through  the rooster head.

Tracks to guide and support the gin pole should be in place and properly adjusted to ensure the load is secured.

A mechanism shall be in place to prevent the gin pole from tipping during the jumping process.

Riding gin poles is prohibited at all times. 

 
Rigging:

The design, construction, inspection, maintenance, and operation of slings, shackles, links, blocks, lifting eyes, hooks, cross arm straps,  and other lifting components shall be in compliance with applicable regulatory and manufacturer requirements.

All rigging and hoisting components shall be stamped or tagged with appropriate load ratings/capacities.

Homemade rigging components are prohibited.

Workers rigging loads shall inspect all rigging and lifting devices prior to each use.

If defects are found, the equipment must be taken out of service and tagged “Danger, Do Not Use – Defective” or destroyed.

Know the weight of the load being lifted and the capacity of the lifting equipment.

Do not secure or shorten slings by knotting or using bolts.

Pad or protect slings from sharp edges.

Secure materials being hoisted.

Be aware that when using cable clamps on wire rope, the “U” section must be in contact with the dead end of the rope.

Loads shall be centered in the lifting component and hooks should never be tip or back loaded.

Use only hooks with a spring loaded safety latch

Use a shackle whenever more than two-choker eyes are placed on a hook and do not exceed a sling to load angle of 30˚.

Use the shackle with the pin up. 

 
Ladders

Ladders must be rated for industrial or heavy-duty use (Class 1A). 

All ladders shall be inspected for defects or damage prior to each use. Damaged ladders must be removed from service.

Face and maintain three points of contact while ascending and descending a ladder.

Use a rope and bucket for carrying or lifting material.

Do not use metal ladders around or near electric lines.

Do not tie ladders together.

Correct slope for a straight/extension ladder is 1 to 4. That means 1 foot from the base for every 4 feet of height.

Extend a straight/extension ladder 3 feet above top landing.

Open and lock step ladders fully and do not fold ladders and use in place of a straight ladder.

Do not stand or step on the top platform or top step. 

 
Scaffolds

Only approved SBA scaffold subcontractors shall serve as the Competent Person for scaffold assembly, disassembly, alteration, movement and repair.

Scaffolds shall be inspected before each work shift.

Guardrails, midrails, and toe boards shall be installed on all open sides or edges.

Place scaffolds on secure footing. Unstable objects, such as boards, boxes, loose brick, or hollow concrete block must not be used.

Report any damage immediately.

Do not climb on or work from the cross bracing, top rail, or mid rail of a scaffold.

Use approved fall protection equipment if guardrails are not used.

Equip scaffolds with ladders and do not climb structural members.

Do not remain on scaffolds when they are being moved. 

 
12, Material Handling & Housekeeping: 
 
All materials shall be properly stacked and secured to prevent sliding, falling or collapse. Aisles, steps and walkways shall be kept clear for the safe movement of employees and equipment. 
 
Use proper lifting techniques when handling materials: 
 

Establish good footing before attempting to lift. 

Do not lean over. Keep your back straight. 

 
Bend at the knees and not at the waist. 
 

Bend your knees and get down close to the load. 

Use your legs when lifting. 

Whenever possible use mechanical aids to reduce the amount of lifting. 

 
Housekeeping:

During project planning, considerations must be made for the adequate disposal of scrap, waste, and surplus materials. 
 

Hazards associated with poor housekeeping include:

Tripping over loose objects on floors, stairs, rooftops, and platforms;

Slipping on greasy, wet or dirty surfaces;

Elevating the potential for a fire from poorly stored materials and equipment.

Pipes and conduit not stored in racks or stacked to prevent movement.

Work areas shall be kept clear of loose materials, extra tools, unnecessary equipment, scraps, and made orderly throughout the day. 

 7. Spills such as petroleum products or fuels shall be isolated and cleaned up immediately.

 8. The o pen burning of construction debris and waste materials is strictly forbidden.

 9. Electrical cords, ropes, or other similar materials must be routed to minimize the potential for trips and falls and removed as             soon as they are no longer needed. 
 
13, Fire Prevention/Protection: 
 

Use approved metal safety cans for storage and dispensing of flammable liquids (i.e., gasoline). 

Store flammable materials in a well-ventilated area. 

If 25 gallons or more of flammable material are onsite; they must be stored in a flameproof cabinet when not in use. 

Portable fire extinguishers shall be accessible. 

Combustible materials (e.g., wood, paper, and packaging) shall be stored and protected from sources of ignition. 

 
14, Cutting & Welding: 
 

Always store cylinders in an upright position, capped, secured, and protected from being struck. 

Do not store oxygen cylinders within 20 feet of flammable gases. 

Cylinders being transported and stored should have regulators removed and valve protection caps in place. 

All gas fittings and connections should be free from oil, grease, and excess dirt prior to fitting to torch or regulator. 

Use appropriate PPE (i.e., welding hood, cutting goggles, leather gloves) when cutting or welding. Synthetic materials (e.g., polyester)    that melt easily should be avoided. Where required, workers must wear appropriate respiratory protection. 

Before cutting or welding, inspect the area for flammable or combustible materials. Relocate materials prior to cutting or welding (for    materials that cannot be removed fire protection is required, i.e., fire blankets). 

It is mandatory to have a 10lb. ABC portable fire extinguisher available prior to cutting or welding. 

A trained Fire Watch shall be assigned whenever hot work is performed. The Fire Watch shall maintain a continuous uninterrupted watch  over hot work operations and for thirty minutes thereafter.

Hot work may require multiple fire watches.   

 
Guidelines for Port Hole Cutting/Installation:

Actions taken prior to port cutting: (2 person crew minimum)

Complete the company's Pre Work Assessment Survey with sub-contractor(s).

Review the hazards involved with port cutting.

Review the environment around the site and plan for fire watch (if applicable).

Have all fire prevention equipment brought out for inspection and review of placement.

Fire Extinguishers (minimum of two 10lb ABC)

Fire Blankets (minimum of 2)

Water present on site for fire prevention

Have the tools for port cutting, welding and tower climbing brought out and inspected.

Review certifications for welders and climbers for current certification.

Review with crew the placement of workers and fire prevention equipment on the ground (whose on fire watch, who’s on water etc.).

Install temporary ¾” plywood covers over ice bridges and vulnerable equipment to protect against possible fire and falling materials

Inspect structure to determine coax location and identify/remove possible flammable material.

Reciprocating saws and metal cutting circular saws/grinders with carbide blade/disc and depth gauge are recommended for cutting structural steel. 

Coax cables shall be bundled to maintain a minimum 6 inches clearance from the surface of any section to be cut or take other measures to protect cables.

Process for top port cutting:

OXY fuel gas or plasma cutting (i.e. cutting torches) on structures is Strictly Prohibited.

Flush inside of monopoles with water while cutting monopole sections to extinguish hot airborne material.

Have all persons dispatch to their watch area.

Have all exposed coax, in the pole, wetted down as necessary.

Have welder/climber climb the tower and assess the tower for safety and for location of port(s).

Once assessment is made have the welder mark the outline of the port for cutting purposes, using port for template.

Begin cutting the port ensuring that no more than a total gap of 3/16” and it is a round cut.

24. Once port is cut, photos will be taken of the cut.

25. At this point, all members of the ground crew will verify that there are no issues in the pole and around it.

26. The welder will begin to weld the port into place. There will be NO continuous welding.

27. While the weld is cooling, again everyone on the ground will verify the pole for excessive slag and sparks; then wet the area and proceed with the next weld.

28. The welder will then precede to the next location for the port cutting.

29. Only one welder is permitted to weld on the structure at any one time. No simultaneous welding.

30. Pictures are to be taken of all the welded ports.

 

                            NOTE: Only one port at a time will be cut and welded before moving to next port location. 

​

15, Electrical: 
 

All Company employees and subcontractors shall be informed of the existence and associated hazards posed by the energized electrical systems that exist on the project site through the Pre-Work Assessment Survey.

All electrical circuits must be placed into an “electrically safe work condition” (i.e., de-energized, locked out, and tested/verified, prior to performing work on the electrical components, equipment and wiring, etc.). Working on “live”, energized electrical components, equipment, and wiring is not permitted, except when de-energizing the equipment introduces additional or increased hazards or is not feasible due to equipment design or operational limitations. 
           

 
Safe Electrical Work Practices:

Operating Electrical Disconnects: – Ensure that the door or panel cover of the switch compartment is closed and securely latched or in place and fastened properly. Before operating the switch, stand to the side of the enclosure door or cover to position yourself away from the line of fire should an arc blast occur. Look away from the switch and use your non-dominant hand to operate the switch while keeping the free hand from making contact with any surface of the equipment or surrounding structure.

​

Working Space and Clearances: – To prevent electrical shock, personnel must maintain a safe distance from any energized electrical wiring or equipment operating at 50 volts or more. Keep areas in front of all electrical cabinets and panels clear for 36 inches and ensure the access door can be opened at least 90 degrees.

​

Work Near Overhead Power Lines: – Any non qualified person, vehicle, or mechanical equipment working in an elevated position near overhead power lines must maintain at least a 10 foot clearance (in reference to the closest conductive object near the power line) for voltages to ground of 50 kV or below and an additional 4 inches for every 10 kV over 50 kV. If work is to be performed on overhead lines closer than the clearance requirements as identified under Working Space and Clearances, the lines must be de-energized and grounded, insulated, and/or the work performed by a Qualified Person(s). 

Electrical Boxes and Cabinets: – Each outdoor box will be weather-tight, and have a cover, faceplate, or fixture canopy. All openings not in use will be closed with a plug or cover. Covers for boxes carrying over 600 volts, nominal will be marked HIGH VOLTAGE. Never use electrical cabinets for storage. Do not use conduit to support equipment, pipe, or other conduit.

 

Labeling and Marking of Electrical Equipment: – All electrical distribution equipment, panels, and cabinets of 50 volts or higher will be clearly labeled identifying the voltages present and for general Arc Flash Hazard warning. Every disconnect means shall be clearly labeled to indicate which electrical apparatus it controls.

 

Ground Fault Circuit Interrupters (GFCIs): – Ground Fault Circuit Interrupters (GFCI) shall be installed on all circuit breakers for construction power. All flexible cords will be used in conjunction with a GFCI “pigtail” in addition to the GFCI receptacles on the site.

 

Voltage-Rated Tools: – All work on electrical components, equipment, and wiring will be done only using insulated tools rated for at least the voltage present in the system on which work is being performed.

 

Flexible Cords: –

Flexible cords (extension cords) used with grounding-type equipment must contain an equipment- grounding conductor. No flat cords.

Flexible cords and cables shall not be used as a substitute for the fixed wiring of the structure, run through holes in walls, ceilings, or    floors, run through doorways, windows, or similar opening, attached to building surfaces, or concealed behind building walls, ceilings    or floors. 

At no time should flexible cords be spliced or taped together. 

Portable cord equipment, plug-connected equipment, and flexible cord sets must be visually inspected before use on each shift for        external defects and evidence of possible internal damage. 

DO NOT use flexible cords to raise, lower, or pull portable electrical equipment. 

Ensure hands are dry when plugging and unplugging flexible cords and extension cords. 

 
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE): –

Wear the level of PPE suitable for protection against the electrical and arc flash hazard that exists, as indicated on the Arc Hazard      Warning label on the equipment. 

Standard PPE for qualified electrical personnel include a flame retardant shirt and pants with minimum rating of 8 cal/cm2 with cotton t-  shirt, voltage-rated hard hat, safety glasses, and hearing protection. Shirt sleeves shall be completely rolled down and fastened at the      wrist. From this minimum, the arc flash labeling or system voltage level present will be used to determine the PPE level required. 

Dielectric insulated gloves (00 rated voltage gloves) with leather outer glove will be used while performing energized electrical work on systems above 250 volts to ground. Gloves should be certified once every six months. 

Wearing conductive jewelry or clothing (e.g. watch bands, bracelets, rings, necklaces, key chains, cloth with conductive thread) while    performing electrical work is strictly prohibited. 

 
Lockout Tagout Procedure:-

Notify all affected persons of the pending lockout.

Identify all sources of power required to be de-energized and locked out

De-energize equipment (bleeding residual energy).

Apply company provided energy isolation devices and locks with identification tags (One lock per authorized person for each lockout      point). 

Test the equipment using a voltmeter to verify the energy is isolated; 

Perform required work; 

Ensure tools and people are removed and any guards have been replaced; 

Inform affected employees of the removal of locks and tags; and 

Remove the Lockout/Tagout device(s) and energize the equipment. 

 
16, Excavations/Trenching: 
 
If an excavation, other than a pier, exceeds 5 feet in depth or entry into a pier hole is necessary, the Health and Safety Manager shall be notified prior to initiating work. 
 
General Requirements:-

Utilities shall be identified prior to starting any excavation;

A designated Excavation Competent Person shall be utilized for excavations exceeding 5 feet in depth which require entry;

Trenches 5 feet or deeper will require proper shoring or sloping based upon soil classification and in reference to geotechnical tables;

All spoils must be placed a minimum of 2 feet from the edge of the excavation;

Excavations 4 feet in depth or greater must have a stairway, ladder, ramp, or other safe means of egress within 25 feet of any employee;

No employee may enter an excavation exceeding 5 feet where water has accumulated without reassessment by the Excavation  Competent Person;

Excavations greater than 4 feet in depth where a hazardous atmosphere may exist will be tested for potential hazardous atmosphere.These spaces may be classifiable as permit-required confined spaces. The Health and Safety Manager will be contacted prior to commencing work in excavations that may contain oxygen deficiency or other hazardous atmosphere;

Reinforcing steel used in excavations shall be protected to prevent impalement through the use of metal-plated rebar caps or other suitable protection; and

Excavations left overnight must be protected and secured from unauthorized entry. 

 

Soil classifications for excavations exceeding 5 feet

The Excavation Competent Person must classify the excavation soil accordingly. 
 
Stable Rock:- Natural solid mineral material that can be excavated with vertical sides and will remain intact while exposed.

 

Type A Soil:- Examples include clay, silty clay, sandy clay, clay loam, and sometimes silty clay loam and sandy clay loam.

 

Type B Soil:- Examples include silt, silt loam, sandy loam, and sometimes silty clay loam.

 

Type C Soil:- Examples include granular soils like gravel, sand, loamy sand, submerged soil, and soil from which water is freely seeping, and submerged rock that is not stable. 
 
Protective systems for excavations exceeding 5 feet

 

NOTE: Each employee in an excavation exceeding 5 feet shall be protected from cave-ins by the use of adequate shoring or sloping protective systems. 
 

Design of excavation support/shield systems and sloping/benching systems shall be configured to account for excavation size, soil integrity, weather conditions, duration of excavation, and access requirements.

The Excavation Competent Person shall design and select protective systems based upon soil classification and in reference with  geotechnical tables. 

 

Inspections of excavations exceeding 5 feet All excavations shall be inspected by an Excavation Competent Person daily before entry and: 
 

At the start of each shift; 

After rain or snowfall;

After freezing and/or thawing temperatures occur; and

After any condition that can change the integrity of the soil. 

 
During rainy weather, work in excavations shall cease until the Excavation Competent Person has evaluated the excavation and the effect the rain is having. The Excavation Competent Person will need to maintain a regular inspection schedule during the rain if employees will continue to work in the excavation. 
 

Employee information and training:

Individuals identified as the Excavation Competent Person must have completed Excavation Competent Person Training and be approved by the Health and Safety Manager.

Each employee who works in or around an excavation greater than 5 feet shall be trained in the following:

General requirements of this program;

Fall hazards;

Safe entry and exit;

Hazardous atmospheres. 

 
17, Personal Protective Equipment: 
 

Supervisors will ensure all employees maintain their PPE and acquire new equipment when needed. 

PPE should be selected and utilized as the secondary hazard control measure, and safe-work practices and engineering controls utilized as the primary hazard defense. 

All PPE must be inspected each day before use. 

All PPE must be marked with the appropriate American National Standard Institute (ANSI) standard. 

 
Head:  

Hardhats are required at all times on construction sites. 

ANSI approved climbing helmets are permitted on the tower. 

Hard hats are to be worn with the bill in front, except for welders who  are actively welding.

Do not use bump caps or metal hard hats.

Inspect hardhats for cracks and defects daily.

 

Eye:

ANSI-approved safety glasses with side shields must be worn when exposed to eye hazards such as flying or falling objects, airborne dust, concrete chipping, and grinding.  

In some instances (chemical handling, excessive dust, grinding operations) additional eye protection (face shields, cover all goggles) must be worn.  

Burning goggles for gas welding and burning (minimum density - #3).  

​

Hand:

Wear suitable work gloves (leather, Kevlar) while handling materials that can cause lacerations, abrasions, burns, or other injuries.  

Consult with your safety representative when handling chemicals or conducting live electrical (AC/DC) work. 

Rubber gloves shall be utilized to prevent absorption or contact with hazardous chemicals. 

 
Foot: 

Wear substantial leather work shoes or boots with non-slip, non-conductive soles to protect your feet. 

When performing concrete work rubber boots are required. 

Employee shall use a slip-on metatarsal foot guard when using compactors or jackhammers. 

 
Hearing: 

In noisy areas, you may be required to wear hearing protection. 

Do not reuse disposable-type hearing protection (ear plugs). 

 
Respiratory: 

The voluntary use of nuisance dust mask is allowed to provide an additional level of personal comfort, even when not required by the Pre-      Work Assessment Survey. 

Prior to the voluntary use of nuisance-dust masks, workers must complete a Dust Mask Request Form and be trained in the proper use of  dust masks. 

Only filtering face pieces (commonly known as “dust masks”) will be used for nuisance exposures. No “cartridge” air purifying or any air-  supplying respirators will be used for controlling nuisance exposures. 

Requests for use of air-purifying or supplied-air respirators shall be reviewed and approved by the Health and Safety Manager. 

 

18, Hazard Communication: 
 

A chemical inventory list and Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDSs) will be maintained by the company Safety Department and these documents are available to SBA employees and subcontractors through the SBA Portal or by request. 

All containers of hazardous materials must be labeled. It is the responsibility of the employee using the material to ensure that the label is present. 

If labels on original containers are found to be inadequate, illegible or otherwise unacceptable, the material will be held until your Safety Manager has determined if the material will be accepted, and what label is to be applied. 

All secondary container labels must be completed and the label applied before the transfer of the material into the container. If a container has been used previously, the original label must be removed or defaced so that only one hazard label is on the container. 

Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for all hazardous material to which employees are or may potentially be exposed will be obtained and made readily available to all employees. 

The supervisor or crew leader will arrange for employee information and training of existing hazardous materials at the time of initial assignment and whenever a new hazardous material is introduced into the work area. 

Subcontractors are required to provide hazard information for any chemicals with potential exposure affects that are brought onto the jobsite or produced on the jobsite, outside of consumer articles. 

Company employees will receive information and training on existing hazardous substances at the time of initial assignment and whenever a new hazardous substance is introduced into the work area. 

 
19, RF/EME Safety: 
 
Maximum Permissible Exposure (MPE): – The Maximum Permissible Exposure (MPE) is a maximum level of exposure that is specified by the FCC. The MPE is based on frequency, as illustrated in Chart 1 below. The Occupational/Controlled MPE applies in areas where exposure is related to employment duties. The General Population/Uncontrolled MPE applies to persons assumed to have no knowledge of or control over their potential exposure to EME energy. 

Electromagnetic Energy (EME) / Radio Frequency Energy (RF): – RF is a form of EME used for transmitting radio signals. EME/RF is a type of non-ionizing radiation. Other examples of non-ionizing radiation include laser, radar, microwaves, UHF/VHF AM broadcast, paging systems, and infrared.  Damage to the body from EME/RF overexposure is dependent upon time, distance, and shielding from the EME/RF source. 
 
Time-averaging: - Maximum Permissible Exposures are expressed as time-averaged exposures (typically 6- minutes for Occupation/Controlled MPE). The use of time averaging to regulate total exposure allows an individual to work in an area with higher energy levels for shorter durations. 
 
General Work Practices:

Assume all antennas are active.

Before working on antennas notify owners and disable appropriate transmitters. Work on a specific antenna should only be accomplished after the attached transmitters have been turned off. This should be attempted only after contacting the owners or operators. Coordination will help ensure that turning off the equipment will not cause serious disruption of the service;

Maintain safe clearance from all antennas. A small increase in distance from an antenna can have a substantial effect on reducing the EME exposure.

Do not stop in front of antennas.

When climbing a tower, workers should select rest points away from antennas. Workers should always try to keep below or behind antennas to minimize their exposure to the main beam of the antenna.

Use personal EME monitors while working near antennas. When multiple employees are working at an EME site, the “highest risk” employee (the one who will be working closest to the antennas) should be the one wearing the monitor;

Never operate transmitters without shields during normal operation.

Do not operate base station antennas inside equipment rooms. Using antennas inside equipment rooms can increase the exposure to EME levels above FCC guidelines and create undesirable radio frequency interference;

Antenna sites must have physical access control. This is accomplished by fencing around the compound.

When other transmitters are involved, power reduction, lock-out/tag-out, or other control procedures may be necessary. 


 
Electromagnetic Energy Site Signage:

The Federal Communication Commission (FCC) has developed guidance for EME/RF site signage through use of Zones (Blue, Yellow, and Red). To comply with FCC site signage requirements, radio tower and rooftop sites shall be posted in accordance with the following: 
 
Blue Zone (Notice):

The blue zone is an area where the time-weighted exposure is below 20% of the Occupational/Controlled MPE. There is no time limit or special work practices required for this zone and only basic EME awareness is needed. 
 
Yellow Zone (Caution):

The yellow zone is any area where the time-weighted exposure is between 20% - 100% of the Occupational/Controlled MPE. In this zone, the energy fields are within acceptable exposure limits, however areas adjacent may exceed acceptable limits. Only personnel with the appropriate training, knowledge, and understanding of EME procedures should work in this area. 
 
Red Zone (Warning):

The red zone is any area where the time-weighted exposure levels are above 100% of Occupational/Controlled MPE. Areas determined to require red zone classification require special procedures, engineering controls, and restricted access. Examples of the procedures that may be implemented include: 
 

Restricted site access;

Lockout/tagout of transmitter equipment during maintenance;

Re-engineering site to reduce EME fields; or

Control of antenna types used on the site. 

 
Personal Protective Equipment (for EME/RF):-

While SBA does not routinely require the use of PPE for control of EME/RF hazards, a particular site or type of EME/RF hazard may warrant the need for specialized PPE. In this event, the SBA Health and Safety Manager will communicate with field supervision for specific PPE selection. Each employee must inspect the protective clothing to ensure it is in good condition prior to each use. 
 
Employee Information and Training:-All personnel entering an active SBA site that is demarcated as a yellow or red zone shall have EME/RF awareness training. More advanced EME safety training is required for all employees who may work in fields above the occupational/controlled environment limits (red zone). 