
What is Workshop Safety Measures?

​

Simple steps to safety:

You can go about setting up your safe workplace by following these simple steps.

 
Getting started:

Successful safety cultures are led from the top, where your actions and attitudes send a message to the people who work in your business that you care about and are serious about their health and safety.Commit to work health and safety by defining your own responsibilities and those of your workers, team leaders and supervisors. Provide the necessary resources to meet those responsibilities.

 
A simple written work health and safety policy, developed in consultation with your workers, will go a long way towards achieving this.

This is a sample document for you to personalise and tailor to suit your particular business needs and operations.

Your policy should:

Note everyone’s duties and responsibilities

State a commitment to improving work health and safety, and how best to achieve a safe workplace

Be dated and signed, displayed at the workplace and accessible to workers

Be regularly review.

 

Talking with your team:

Involve the people who work in your business to identify and resolve health and safety issues. Effective consultation also encourages greater awareness of issues and can lead to an improved safety culture and outcomes. Consultation can be through informal toolbox talks or organised committees, while general safety information can be provided through notice boards and signage. Use the sample Record of Safety Discussions to help note what has been talked about and actions taken.

 

Managing hazards:

Managing hazards should be a continuous improvement process that finds problems (identify hazards), gathers information about them (assess the risks) and solves them (control the risks).Use the hierarchy of control approach to help you mitigate the risks.Level 1 is the most effective control measure and level 3 the least effective. A combination of all the hierarchy control measures can be used.Identify all hazards/tasks that can pose a risk to the people who work in or for your business as well as your customers and visitors. Take action to control the risks. Develop simple and safe work procedures detailing how this is done. These are sample documents for you to personalise and tailor to suit your particular business needs and operations. 

 

Informing, training and supervising:

Provide workers with easy to understand information and training about particular job hazards and how to work safely. Provide appropriate supervision to ensure that what’s taught at training is being followed.Make sure that workers who are new to your business are correctly inducted and adequately supervised.  These are sample documents for you to personalise and tailor to suit your particular business needs and operations. 

 

Maintain a safe workplace:

Once safe systems and procedures are in place, they  need to be maintained through an ongoing focus on health and safety. 
Maintain a safe workplace by:

Carrying out regular workplace inspections

Ensuring equipment and tools are safe to use  and maintained

Fixing high risks immediately and others as soon as possible in order of level of risk

Discussing common injuries, work practices and procedures with workers

Keeping up-to-date knowledge of product  labels, Safety Data Sheets and manufacturer’s instruction manuals

Having an easy to use hazard, near miss and  injury reporting process as well as reviewing incident reports

Planning and regularly testing of emergency procedures (e.g. for free, medical, chemical leaks)

Keeping workers informed of any changes, and providing training opportunities when anything new at work is introduced.    

 

Record keeping:

Document what you’re doing  to maintain and improve your  work health and safety. Keeping records will help you to monitor the health and safety performance of your business as well as meet your legal requirements.

 
You will need to keep the following records:

All incident/hazard reports

Hazardous chemicals and asbestos registers  (if those substances are in your workplace)

Plant registration documents

Tests, maintenance, inspection and repairs for specific items of plant.

 
It’s also useful to keep records of:

Hazard identification, risk assessment and  control processes

Maintenance of all items of plant and equipment

Workers’ induction and training. 

These are sample documents for you to personalise and tailor to suit your particular business needs and operations. 

​

Monitoring and reviewing to improve:

Managing and improving health and safety needs to be an ongoing process. Safety processes and operations evolve with time, and workers and equipment come and go, changing the risks in your workplace.Having followed these steps and established the ways you will work safely (known as your safety systems), you should regularly review and monitor how effective they are, as well as make any necessary adjustments to keep them  up-to-date and continually improve.
 

Other responsibilities:

Your work health and safety responsibilities also include the following:

​

Fire and emergency procedures:

Develop Fire and Emergency Procedures (e.g. fire extinguishers, alarms, emergency contacts), evacuation plans, and testing of procedures and plans.

 
First aid:

Determine first aid requirements (e.g. first aid kits, people trained to administer first aid). 


Work environment and facilities:

Ensure tools and equipment are safe to use and are maintained and regularly serviced. Supply workers with appropriate safety gear, where necessary. Provide facilities for workers (e.g. toilets, drinking water, washing and dining areas, shelter).Provide and maintain a physical work environment free of health and safety risks (e.g. workspace, lighting, ventilation).Ensure workers do not eat food in the workshop area (e.g. provide a separate dining area). 

​

Hierarchy of risk control:

The ways of controlling risks are ranked from the highest level of protection and reliability to the lowest should be analyzed. This ranking is known as the hierarchy of risk control.You must always aim to eliminate a hazard, which is the most effective control. If this is not reasonably practicable, you must minimise risks by working through the other levels in the hierarchy.

 

Level 1 control measures:

The most effective control measure involves eliminating the hazard and associated risk. The best ways to do this are by either removing the hazard completely (e.g. getting rid of trip hazards, disposing of unwanted chemicals), or not introducing the hazard into the workplace in the first place (e.g. work at ground level, not at height, to eliminate the risk of a fall).Eliminating hazards is often cheaper and more practical to achieve at the design or planning stage of a product, process or place used for work.In these early phases, there is greater scope to design out hazards or incorporate risk control measures that are compatible with the original design and functional requirements. For example, a noisy machine could be designed and built to produce as little noise as possible, which is more effective than providing workers with personal hearing protection.It may not be possible to eliminate a hazard if doing so means that you cannot make the end product or deliver the service. If this is the case, eliminate as many of the risks associated with the hazard as possible.   

​

Level 2 control measures:

If it is not reasonably practicable to eliminate the hazards and associated risks, you should minimise them using one or more of the following:

Substitute the hazard with something safer (e.g. replace noisy machinery with quieter models).

Isolate the hazard from people – physically separate people from the source of harm by distance or using barriers (e.g. install guard rails around service pits, store chemicals in a fume cabinet).

Use engineering controls – introduce a mechanical device or process that is physical in nature (e.g. use trolleys or hoists to move heavy loads, place guards around moving parts of machinery, install residual current devices). 

 

Level 3 control measures:

These control measures do nothing to control the hazard at the source, relying instead on human behaviour and supervision. Used on their own, they tend to be least effective in minimising risks.

 
Two approaches to reducing risk in this way are:

Administrative controls – work methods or procedures designed to minimise hazard exposure (e.g. develop procedures on how to operate machinery safely, limit exposure time to a hazardous task, use hazard warning signs)

Personal protective equipment (PPE) – which limit exposure to the harmful effects of a hazard, but only if worn and used correctly (e.g. ear muffs, respirators, protective eyewear). 

Administrative controls and PPE should be used as a last resort when no other practical control measures are available, as an interim measure 